TO ONE PLAYING
Play on with that music all lonely
Wandering through me like a breeze
Half‑lost in the calm of night,
A melody half‑heard only
Like the sound of stupendous seas
That in motion feel a delight.
For in thy rhythm soft pealing,
For thou in that meterless rhyme
Awakest in me a spirit stress,
A widening, deadening of feeling
That is to my normal consciousness
As Eternity is to Time.
12-1905
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 56.
Destinado ao volume «Nonsense».

HEART‑MUSIC
Leaning almost upon thy breast
I heard thy heart's life - made unrest...
And thy heart's beating has a sound
That reminds me of aught I heard long ago,
Long before this life, but what
I do not know, I do not know...
'Twas something going round and round
Something of terrible and of strange
That even now doth shake my soul.
I strive to remember - I fail, l fail
The unmemoried memory doth shake my soul.
‘Twas something terrible and strange,
Going round and going round,
And it had a sound like thy heart's beat...
The memory hangs on my soul's darkness
But notion from my mind doth fleet.
I remember but this: it went round and round
And now thy heart hath such a sound.
12-1905
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 58.
1ª publ. in  Fernando Pessoa: o Amor, a Morte, a Iniciação . Yvette K. Centeno. Lisboa: Regra do Jogo, 1985.

AN IDYLL OF TO‑DAY
She
If every tear of mine were gold
And every sigh a tear,
Wouldst thou not then with kisses bold
Entrap them falling clear?
If at each word I spoke of love
Pearls rained from out the air,
How pleasant would to thee then prove
To hear me speak for e'er!
He
If at each look of love I cast
A cheque were signed and made,
If each tear's ending were the last
Touch of received and paid;
If each soft glance were a banknote
And the same every sigh.
Wouldst thou not have me learn by rote
Love's shows of misery?
Both
What can we do? What are we both
But beings of our time?
Gold is the meat of living's broth,
The vowel of the rhyme.
Even a token sad and old.
A certain price will woo.
Our love would but be true as gold
If we were gold all through.
1905
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 58.

TO A HAND
Give me thy hand. With my wounded eyes
I would see what this hand contains:
Ah, what a world of hopes here lies!
What a world of feelings and doubts and pains!
Oh to think that this hand in itself contains
The mystery of mysteries.
This hand has a meaning thou dost not know,
A meaning deeper than human fears;
This hand perchance in times long ago
Wiped off strange and unnatural tears;
Perhaps its gesture was full of snears
Perchance its clenching was full of woe.
There is that in thy hand my sould doth dream
And the shades that haunt my mind;
The howl of the wind and the flow of the stream,
The flow of the stream and the howl of the wind,
All that is horrible and undefined
Of the things that are in the things that seem.
As I look at thy hand my mind is rife
Of thoughts and memories deeper than rhyme;
Thy hand is a part of my soul's deep life,
And l knew thy hand ere the birth of time,
And in ages past it led me to crime,
……
A world of woes and of fears and sighs
And love that better had been hate,
And crimes and wars and victories,
And the painful fall of many a state -
All these and more that the heart abate
My raving soul in thy hand descries.
No painter mad, not a fetichist
O'er thy hand would be thus held blind.
At mere blank thought of its being kissed
But my lips l thrill with a fear none find
In the waking thoughts of a human mind
Save when reason by its own self is missed.
Thy hand has a meaning thou dost not know,
A meaning deeper than human fears;
It has aught of the sea and of the sun's glow
And the seasons too and the months and years,
And the colour hidden in human tears
And the form and number in human woe.
Thy hand was a lofty and empty home,
A collar of pearls and a castle keep;
Thy hand knows well all the thoughts that roam,
Thy hand is the music eternal and deep
That long ere birth held my soul asleep
In a palace quaint with a curious dome.
How finely made is this hand of thine
With its fingers tapering and white.
Soft and palely warm and fine;
There is something in it of day and night.
Ah, dearest child, could I read aright
The text before me deep and divine.
There's a kind of Fact that persists and hangs
O'er thy hand, as on a scratched scroll:
'Tis as if some thought had buried its fangs
In a unknown part of my soul.
In a land far in me a bell doth toll,
And my heart aches wild as it shrinks or clangs.
There is aught of new and wild and unreal
In thy hand where my look is pained:
‘Tis as if thy hand in itself could see all
Horrible thought, where fear is gained
By a drollness mad and dimly sustained
As of some wide hint out of the Ideal.
There is aught of Personal, of It, of Such
In thy hand and o'er me there steals
A sense of dread like a murderer's clutch;
I know not how, my hand in thine feels
An eternal thing and my mad brain reels
As if eternity we could touch.
I see that hand not a hand, but whence
This horrible Fact that creeps in me!
Ah, I have of thy hand the seeing intense
But aught more than hand in that place I see
That abrupt [elision?] did make to be
Between thought of things and what we call sense.
My thought doth look at thy hand direct
Without eyes or sense or aught of this,
And my reason at such a thing is wrecked
Into such a fear that both pain and bliss
Are plunged in conscious unconsciousness
For that is no hand that my dreams detect.
And I gaze yet more and I shake from me
The dream of time and the dream of space,
And as a drowner who sinks in the sea
I dream of the wonders of all we trace
In everything and I plunge full‑face
In the sense of what more than seems to be.
There is aught of lovely, wild and unbrute
In thy hand, and I love it well;
In fearing more than pain thoughts of hell
By a sudden portal in the Visible
I have a glimpse of the Absolute.
The sight of thy hand of a horrible heaven
The portals mute throws open again
Thy hand is like music, in it I gain
Passing a wild fear and a bitter pain
Weird things more weird than the sense of Seven.
All things stare mystery at my mind,
But thy hand most, to oblivion conn'd
Thrilled with a mute life not all defined,
What is thy hand in itself beyond
The scope of sense where the heart is fond,
The realm of thought where the soul is blind?
Where is the soul that thy hand reveals
In its own  there‑self  till   its thought affrights?
What bells are those that say HAND in peals
That traverse impossible infinites?
What fills with lightnings of hands the nights
Where the sense of dread into thoughts congeals?
Take thy hand away; for I now shall dream
Of strange and grotesque and unnatural lands
Watered by many a painful stream
Whose waves are hands, whose banks of hands
Of gardens with trees whose leaves are hands
And a white stiff hand covering the sun's gleam.
Then, on horror worst, they begin to live
With a vital life, and to grasp and clutch,
And to twitch and squirm till my thoughts unweave,
And like worms and snails that my throat should touch
My soul qualms and retches at horror such
At fear's transcendent superlative.
And what more doth follow I cannot say,
But it seems that madly I traverse, lone,
Tracts of hells where a hand doth stay
In such a manner that if a groan
Of a madman could in its soul be known
It would be to it as to night is day.
And my thoughts drag on in their weary strain;
Wild and grotesque, or quick or slow,
Uncouth and unseemly they reel in my brain,
Startingly mad as they go,
As a sudden laugh in the midst of woe
Or a clown in a funeral train.
1-1906
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 60.
1ª publ. in  Fernando Pessoa: o Amor, a Morte, a Iniciação . Yvette K. Centeno. Lisboa: Regra do Jogo, 1985.

THE CLOWN
Through this mad mind relentless vaults
A grim ides weird and wild
With a meaning wilder than human fears
A clown in grotesque somersaults;
And I weep at him as a child
In a man's hard tears.
There is no roof, there is no floor;
Horror! no space is known in all!
‑ Relentlessly I see he vaults! ‑
There is the clown and nothing more,
Who ceaselessly doth rise and fall ‑
The clown in grotesque somersaults.
Relentless, how relentlessly
In me, who seek what means each thing,
This spaceless vision neatly vaults!
My legs to vault almost forget me.
What awful meaning can this bring
The clown in grotesque somersaults.
1-1906
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 68.

INSOMNIA
Last night I had not the blessing
Of a deep or a quiet slumber,
For thoughts most wild and distressing
Every woe and fear expressing
My drowsy sense did encumber.
And the clock, with its curst possession
Of night with its monotone,
Is a madman mad with a word-obsession,
Sorrowfully lone.
A thousand times a reeling
Of reason around my world,
And around reason feeling
The very darkness wheeling
In a blacker darkness hurled.
And the clock! Ah, its curst possession
Of night with its monotone!
How it treasured well its word-obsession
Dolorously lone!
If I slept awhile, without number
Came the dreams, and I had not the grace
Of the shade of a shadow of slumber.
I fell in descent from reason steep,
In consciousness pale disgrace;
There was a fall half-senseless and deep
And I woke with a start from sleep
For I struck the bottom of space.
And I woke to the clocks's possession
Of night with its monotone,
Chuckling a meaning past its obsession,
Maniacally lone.
1-1906
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 70.

SOUL-SYMBOLS
My soul ‑ what is my soul? But symbols mute
Its horror and confusion can give out:
A desert out of space where absolute
Reigns expectation full of horrid doubt.
It gives the sense that giveth, strange and dark,
Some unknown river weird, hauntingly lone,
In some old picture storiless, sole work
Of some great painter horribly unknown.
It is an island out of human track,
Mysterious, old within the sea and full
Of caves and grottoes unexplored and black,
Pregnant with many horrors possible.
It is an olden inn with corridors
Woven in a labyrinth and scarce of light,
Where through the night the sound of shutting doors,
Vague in its cause and place, fills us with fright.
It is a mountain region wild and free,
Precipiced, hid and silent, never seen,
Where we dare not think of what might have been
Nor wish idea of what things may be.
If ever mystery, romance and fear
Have shown their heart on canvas and on scroll,
It must assuredly to men appear
As to mine inner sense appears my soul.
It is a vision-desert full of rocks
Where all than reason is both more and less,
'Tis a lone coast where the sea's endless shocks
Fill with an empty sound its lifelessness.
Something of lost, forgotten, vague and dead,
Yet waking, as a slumberer mystical
Seems to perceive, for who looks knows with dread
That something he doth see to make appal.
All this my soul is in its weak despair,
Full of sense unto pain, of thought to tears,
Having for meed of reason a mute care,
For company to feeling - woes and fears.
So to my glance, as if with opium wide,
My very self is grown a mystery;
In inexstatic fear Life doth abide
And madness like my breath is within me.
2-1906
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 78.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».
1ª publ. in «A Poesia Juvenil de Fernando Pessoa». Georg Rudolf Lind. in  Estudos sobre Fernando Pessoa . Lisboa: Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda, 1981.

What Death doth take for wife is
What life has of good and of fair;
The pain of passing's knife is
Not the less that it is everywhere;
All goes, all flows, all life is
But the wreck of its own self for e'er.
Yet hope we that this going
A semblance and lie can but be;
That the river that is flowing
Will find, how far be it, a sea;
That beyond our frail knowing
A deeper life eternally
Keeps all that seems to wither
All that seems to go wits to-day,
And that in a way to bother [?]
Our subtlest thoughts to dismay
Form and matter together
Live e'er in a timeless  Alway.
3-1906
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 80.

GOD'S WORK
«God's work ‑ how great his power!» said he
As we gazed out upon the sea
Beating the beach tumultuously
Round the land-head.
The vessel then strikes with a crash,
Over her deck the waters rash
Make horror deep in rent and gash.
«God's work» , I said.
7-1906
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 82.
Destinado ao volume «Death of God».

BLIND EAGLE
What is thy name? and is it true that thou
A land unknown of men inhabitest?
What pain obscure is figured on thy brow?
What cares upon thy heart contrive their nest?
Of human things the purest and the best
No constant beauty doth thy soul allow;
And through the world thou bear'st thy deep unrest
Lock'd in a smile thine eyes do disavow.
Being of wild and weird imaginings,
Whose thoughts are greater than mere things can bind,
What is the thing thou seekest within things?
What is that thought thy thinking cannot find?
For what high air has thy strong spirit wings?
To what high vision aches it to be blind?
11-1906
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 82.
Destinado ao volume «Sonnets in Many Moods».

EPITÁFIO
Aqui jaz Alexander Search
Que Deus e os homens deixaram só,
Que sofreu e chorou ser escárneo da natureza.
Recusou o Estado, recusou a igreja,
Recusou Deus, a mulher, o homem e o amor,
Recusou a terra em volta e o céu além.
Resumiu assim o seu saber:
(...)e amor não há
Nada no mundo existe de sincero
Salvo a dor, o ódio, a luxúria e o medo
E mesmo estes são ainda suplantados
Pelos males que causam.
Andava pelos vinte anos quando morreu
Estas foram as suas últimas palavras:
Deus, a Natureza e o Homem, malditos sejam!
s.d.
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 67.
Tradução: (?)

A VERY ORIGINAL DINNER
(Texto inglês original não disponível; consultar a bibliografia indicada.)
Fernando Pessoa e a Literatura de Ficção
. Maria Leonor Machado de Sousa. Lisboa: Novaera, 1978
- .

Por isso, muito bem disse Caeiro
A Natureza é partes sem um todo.
O Universo, como conjunto, síntese e não soma das coisas, é uma ideia abstracta. Por isso não há Universo. Não é por não sabermos se não há; é por sabermos, por isso que ele é uma ideia abstracta, que não há.
O exemplo melhor das ideias abstractas e do para que servem são os  números ,   a matemática. Nada mais útil, mas, em si, nada mais falso. Só um louco julga que o número 5, por exemplo, é  uma coisa :   mas o n. 0  5 é útil, como os outros números, porque é um meio de compreender a realidade, não em si mesma, mas tem utilidade, em relação apenas a nós e à nossa imperfeição.
Se os nossos sentidos fossem perfeitos, não precisávamos de inteligência, as ideias abstractas de nada nos serviriam.
A imperfeição dos nossos sentidos faz com que não concordemos nunca em absoluto sobre um objecto ou um facto do exterior. Nas ideias abstractas concordamos em absoluto. Dois homens não vêem uma mesa da mesma maneira; mas ambos entendem a palavra «mesa» da mesma maneira. Só querendo  visualizar  uma mesa é que divergirão; isso, porém, não é a ideia abstracta da mesa.
s.d.
Poemas Completos de Alberto Caeiro . Fernando Pessoa. (Recolha, transcrição e notas de Teresa Sobral Cunha.) Lisboa: Presença,
1994.
- 206.
N. do A.: «Alberto Caeiro (entrevista)»

OH, SOLITARY STAR
Oh, solitary star, that with bright ray
Lookst from the bosom of envolving night,
Loveliest that none contests thy spaceful way
Now when with rivals is the sky not dight.
Vouch safe on me to keep thy tiny stare
Blinking at night as if in sleepy joy,
Or as the sleepy eyes of some young fair
Who chides their closing to her thought's warm toy.
That there are other stars I well do know
And others that may shine more bright and true;
And yet I wish them not, for one doth so
Outwit decision and attention sue.
And if from this thou can no lesson learn.
Much hast thou spurned that Goodness may not spurn
s.d.
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 198.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».

THE SPEECH
Before a poor, ignorant crowd
A wild propagandist loud
Shrieked a socialistic speech,
But such pompous terms and thick,
Artistic, scientific
Went with each oratoric screech
That the crowd in silence heard
Wishing of course to applaud,
But expecting a strong word
They could understand, to laud.
«Procrastinators, banditti
Reactionary, servile,
Full‑considerately vile!ª
In this way, pompously witty
He talked and the crowd heard on.
«You», he continued, «each Don
Of financial bloated leer,
I excommunicate here
Before Justice throne severe;
You I detest, I abhor…»
Here a laugh applauding rough
The wide air from the crowd tore.
«That word», they cried in a roar,
«We understand well enough!»
s.d.
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 200.

A WINTER DAY
I
'Tis a void winter day, sad as a moan.
A sense of loneliness, as of a stone
Upon a grave, or of a rock in sea
Rests like a mighty shadow over me.
I am unnerved, unminded by the pall
Of solemn clouds that, weighty over all,
Curtail the vision; and upon mine ear
The City's rumble brings despair and fear
To crush my spirit free and wild.
The rain,
Reiterated horribly, again
Beast with its drops at my cold window‑pane
With such a sound as makes us know it cold.
The world is ghostly, undaylike and old,
And weary passengers, with cautious tread,
Yet hurried, walk within the streets soul‑dead
In the unkindness of their hue of lead.
The streets are streamlets, and perpetual
A sound of little waters, on roof, on wall,
Down in the streets, in pipes, in window‑glass
And into rooms doth wetly come and pass.
All is the rain's.
All is pale wetness, darkness inly cold,
A sentiment of waste things and of old
Making all things exterior sorrows, pains;
And all we hear and feel and know and see
Is wrapt around as with a masking cloak
In inconceivable monotony.
All in the houses and up from the street
Is a long watery shuffle of heavy feet,
A sound of drenched garments, and a sense
Of a sad chillness, latently intense.
Through cracks in doors and windows a gust cold
Of wind penetrates like a memory of old
Times to make freeze my body, ill reclined
Upon a couch, a sufferer with my mind.
Life in the streets is sad, a monotone
More dull than usual ordinariness:
Business and work have lost their usual stress,
The vender's cries are each of them a moan
Grotesque, desolate, as forlorn and half‑dead
Hearts might produce which make a war (?) attempt
At talking normally, as if they not bled.
Half‑childish urchins, gloriously unkempt
Laugh at the water that cart‑wheels upshed.
The muddy urchins in the streets that play
Make shades of envy in my soul to stay.
Couples, some newly‑married, others not,
Who in the commonness of their no‑thought
Have a deep happiness I would not have,
A joy to which I would prefer the grave,
Pass in the street. some gay and some sedate.
I feel me no like men in any way.
I envy those - I speak true - without hate
And without admiration, isolate (?).
I would that l were happy as they are
But not with that their happiness. Thus far
Such living as theirs is were unto me
Misery, penury, monotony.
Alas for all who dream! Alas for us,
Poor poets, more or less mad, more or less
Foolish! In this consists true happiness!
In knowing how to be monotonous.
Happy are they who can see without sorrow
To‑day yield us to‑morrow
And yet to‑morrow and to‑day to them
Different days because different days,
Which are to me (save that they pass) the same.
II
The view I have of this cold winter day,
The deep depression that makes my thoughts stray
Is but a symbol and a synthesis
Of what my life perpetually is.
How deep my thoughts in pain and sadness are!
How wreck'd my soul in its intense despair!
How desolate, disconsolately mute
My heart is of the words that like scents shoot
From the full flower of true youthfulness!
How locked am I within my own distress!
How in the tragic circle soul‑confined
Of my abhorred self!
Not one ambition leads me - power nor pelf,
No wish for fame, no love of poor mankind.
But I am weary, desolate and cold
E'vn as this winter day. I have grown old
In watching dreams go by and pass away
Leaving a memory pure and bright
Of aught that was and died as light
Without the living horror of decay.
Is this thy life, irresolute soul of mine?
How pale the sun of thy sad morn doth shine!
How it forebodes the cloudiness that comes
Outstretched wings of the storm whose muffled drums
Of warning in the paling day are heard
Deep in the distance lesseningly blurred.
Thou look'st not death nor evil in the face
Poor soul despairing in life's troubled race!
All forms of life, all things have been to thee
Mutations of eternal misery.
All years, all homes to thee have been
In the same drama many a change of scene.
Thou hast not learned to live, but thou dost cling
Madly to life (dreading Death's night severe),
As if life or the world were anything!
s.d.
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 200.

MANIA OF DOUBT
All things unto me are queries
That from normalness depart,
And their ceaseless asking wearies
My heart.
Things are and seem, and nothing bears
The secret of the life it wears.
All things' presence e'er is asking
Questions of disturbing pain
With dreadful hesitation tasking
My brain
How false is truth? How much doth seem
Since dreams are all and all's a dream.
Before mystery my will faileth
Torn with war within the mind,
And Reason like a coward quaileth
To find
More than themselves all things reveal
Yet that they with themselves conceal.
19-6-1907
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 62.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium» e ao conjunto «Documents of Mental Decadence».
1ª publ.: «A Poesia Juvenil de Fernando Pessoa». Georg Rudolf Lind. in  Estudos sobre Fernando Pessoa . Lisboa: Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda, 1981.

EPIGRAM
«I love my dreams», I said, a winter morn,
To the practical man, and he, in scorn,
Replied: «I am no slave of the Ideal,
But, as all men of sense, I love the Real.»
Poor fool, mistaking all that is and seems!
I love the Real wheN I love my dreams.
1906?
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 206.

FLASHES OF MADNESS
I.
Thy hand with its lovely fingers
And the heavy rings on them!
How my soul over them lingers
Each finger with a heavy gem,
Each ring like a small diadem!
When thou and I are alone,
One only wish my soul stings —
Holding thy hand in my own,
All night, while the night-bird sings,
To take off and replace thy rings.
1-1906
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 63.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium».

THE WOMAN IN BLACK
I
My tale is simple, sad and brief -
As simple as all tales of grief,
As brief as all that is ours, though
It seem eternal to its woe;
No tale of glorious deeds or fair,
But one short poem of despair;
Dark as all things where man is caught
In the fine‑poisoned nets of thought.
Here is no flame of love's old fire,
Nor song of pent or free desire,
No thousand herses [?] fill its plan,
But it is centred round one man.
A man? A boy, if boyhood be
That where is sober misery.
About a boy all moves, an elf
Careless of happiness or pelf,
But fated to sing but himself.
I was not born to joy nor love.
The earth below, the sky above
Compel a sense within my soul
That deeply, heavily doth roll,
Like a tremendous, mystic sea
In lands where dreams alone can be;
A feeling that a sadness is,
Weeping in broken‑hearted bliss;
A sense that is a deep despair -
I know not why I should feel this
Before the things that are most fair.
Beauty is more than pleasure's joy:
That which must please is made to cloy,
And Nature cloys not with distaste
But gives a sorrow [?], as of past
Things whence the Present does inherit
Something where [...] is and deep
Beauty delicious in a sleep
That is half‑sadness to the spirit.
For Pleasure is not Joy - we know
Joy lives as sorrow in the heart;
One or the other lives; the dart
That Sorrow kills comes from Joy's bow.
Pleasure and distaste are not so.
Sorrow and Joy are as the strange
And unknown forms of life and change
That are ignored in depths of ocean:
Pure is the depth of their emotion.
Pleasure and Pain are not like these,
But as on surfaces of seas
The alternation of their motion
And shows of shifting without end.
Joy may like the sun's light transcend
The clouds of Pain; Pleasure may be
The face and look of Misery.
III
Ay, Nature chills me with deep fear,
For Nature, to my seeing, spent
With looking on my woes too near,
It is but Mystery eloquent.
The plainest stone, the simplest flower -
All have a meaning deep and vast,
Mocking their living of an hour.
But this significance, that hath past
So oft to poet’s song and word,
Makes them but madmen, even as I,
Speaking in outline [?] sense absurd
Strange thoughts for beings that must die.
But Man to me is dreader still,
The thing of thought, feeling and will,
Which is so dark unto mine eyes
That of the sense he calls his soul
- Let not of seeing speak the mole [?] -
I cannot dream to theorize.
For men, who have wrought creeds and codes
And guided nations by the roads
Of feeling and of speculation,
Have seen as much - nothing - as I
Into the world. All could perceive
That Nature aught doth signify:
Beyond this they could stop or rave.
Most raved and therefore could believe.
Yet I, naturally wrapt about,
Normally, as in feathers the bird,
With hesitation and with doubt,
Find all the world a thing absurd.
Because myself, a part of it,
Am an absurdity unfit.
Too young I learnt to reason coldly
And draw conclusions firmly, boldly,
From thoughts and facts to shatter creeds,
Careless of man's mendacious needs.
Preciseness cast in me the seeds
Of madness, and the soil was good
For that abnormal growth of pain
Whose flowers are red, colour of blood.
Too soon I learned to see too clear,
And therefore nothing now can capture
My heart, to which reasoning is rapture,
That sees night where most poets say
«'Tis day - I see it all - ­'tis day.ª
They sing of joy, T sing of fear.
Alas! Why should I stop thus long
Over the illness of my life,
That has Insanity for wife?
Turn I back with an impulse strong.
Leave I this shallowness and sing.
The deeper sorrow of my song.
s.d.
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 208.

FLASHES OF MADNESS
II.
When thou seeëst me spend hours
Holding in a feverish glance
Thy mouth or teeth, or thy hand,
And notest how my soul devours
With a sleepness like to trance
The commonest things that stand
And askest what in them I see
That into each my spirit delves
As if each had a mystery,
Thou err'st in thy conjecturings,
For what ever obsesses me
Is not things in their weary selves
But the being there of things.
2-1906
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 64.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium».

FLASHES OF MADNESS
III.
Eyes are strange things.
Meaning in them becomes life,
Life in them has wings.
Look at me thus. Thy glance is mad and rare.
Thine eyes show deep and wild an inner strife.
How they are more than Horror fair!
1908
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 65.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium».

FLASHES OF MADNESS
IV.
1.
When thou didst speak but now I felt
A terror mad and strange.
Conceive it thou. I could have knelt
To thy lips, to their curve, to its change.
The talking curve of thy lips
And thy teeth but slightly shown
Were my delirium's waking whips.
I felt my reason overthrown.
A super-sensual fetichism
Haunts my deep-raving brain.
Greater than ever grows the abysm
Of my reason's and feeling's schism,
Cut with the pickaxe of pain.
More than they show all things contain.
2.
Something not of this world doth lie
In thy smile, in thy lips live turn;
A figure, a form I know not why
That wakes in me — without a sigh
But with terror I cannot spurn
With terror wild and mute —
Is it remembrances, is it
Desires so vague half-known they flit
And not in thought nor sentiment take root?
My mind grows madder and more fit
In everything to catch and find
Meanings, resemblances defined
By not a form that thought can hit.
Smile not. Thou canst not comprehend!
What is this? What truth doth sleep
In these ravings without end
And beyond notion deep?
Laugh not. Know'st thou what madness is?
Wonder not. All is mysteries.
Ask not. For who can reply?
Weep for me, child, but do not love me
Who have in me too much that is above me,
Too much I cannot call «I».
Weep for the ruin of my mind
Weep rather, child, that things so deep should move me
To lose the clear thoughts that could prove me
One worthy of mankind.
5-7-1908
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 66.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium».

FLASHES OF MADNESS
V.
My child, I see thine eyes upon
A shadow, as cast by the wings
When a swift bird passes close by
The castle-window before the sun:
So through thy glance the shadows fly...
The souls of things dead and bygone
Haunt the appearances of living things
12-1905
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 66.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium»

EPITAPH
Here lieth A[lexander] S[earch]
Whom God and man left in the lurch
And nature mocked with pain and woe
He believed not in state or church
Nor in God, woman, man or love
Nor earth below nor heaven above.
His knowledge did to this about:
(...) and love is not
Nothing is everywhere sincere
Save sorrow, hatred, lust and fear
And even these sometimes do look
Less than in the ill they work.
He died at twenty odd
This was is dying   sentiment:
Accurst be Nature, Man and God.
s.d.
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 67.

APOLLO UNTO NEPTUNE
Apollo unto Neptune said:
«Come, I shall drink the sea!»
But Neptune laughed out like a lad
In his boyish jollity,
And cried: «You would drink the earth, if you could,
And infinity.»
And the poet the symbol who understood
Felt his misery.
8-12-1907
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 68.

EPIGRAM
«I love my dreams», I said, a winter morn,
To the practical man, and he, in scorn,
Replied: «I am no slave of the Ideal,
But, as all men of sense, I love the Real.»
Poor fool, mistaking all that is and seems!
I love the Real when I love my dreams.
s.d.
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 69.
1ª publ. in  A metáfora e o fenómeno amoroso nos poemas ingleses de Fernando Pessoa.  Catarina T. S. Edinger. Porto: Brasília Ed., 1982.

Bond entered into by Alexander Search, of Hell, Nowhere, with  Jacob Satan , master, though not king, of the same place:
1. Never to fall off or shrink from the purpose of doing good to mankinil.
2. Never to write things, sensual or otherwise evil, which may be to the detriment and harm of those that read.
S. Never to forget, when attacking religion in the name of truth, that religion can ill be substituted and that poor man is weeping in the dark.
4. Never to forget men's suffering and men's ill.
+ Satan .
his mark
October 2nd 1907
Alexander Search
1907
Páginas Íntimas e de Auto-Interpretação. Fernando Pessoa. (Textos estabelecidos e prefaciados por Georg Rudolf Lind e Jacinto do Prado Coelho.) Lisboa: Ática, 1966.
- 10.

EPITAPHS
A.S. (Alex[ander] Search)
Here lies a poet who was mad and young
The two things may go together
As to the songs he sung
They were found in winter weather.
EPITAPHS FOR THE FUTURE
Monarchy
Here lies a part of hell that on earth was
(It took it long to pass,
Riddled by way of Justice
[…]
Here lies the other part.
Religion
Here lies the beautiful assassin cold
who smiled upon his victim and singing
Murdering sweet songs to his imagining
Till by his each a (...) he sells
It died because it was old.
4-7-1908
Pessoa por Conhecer - Textos para um Novo Mapa
. Teresa Rita Lopes. Lisboa: Estampa, 1990.
- 152.

Power has three forms - force, authority and opinion. All the evolution of nations and of societies is fundamentally an ascension on the scale of these, from the first to the last. First came the state of violence, rising slowly out of its pure form in the savage tribes and groups. Then comes the rule of authority, begotten of force. And all rends to, or is at, the sway of opinion, this word meaning, of course, «popular will», «democracy». (The persistence of monarchy, authority's best (...), is [...]).
All this evolution represents the gradual approach to the government of the nation by the nation. It begins virtually at an anarchical or semi-anarchical state of things: it is the empire of force, the government of the weak by the strong and of the strong by the stronger. The state of society is then one of [...] stife (if this word may here be used), one of latent or every-day war. Then gradual integration begins; first it is potential. The selection of the fittest begins to split the tribe or nation (no matter how it is called) into two parts. Monarchy and aristocracy are born. This means that force is transformed into authority. Transformed: - be the word noted, for it must not be forgotten - and this is of sovereign importance - that the original basis of authority is force; nor could there be any other basis, any other origin to authority -; authority could not become authority in any other way.
s.d.
Pessoa por Conhecer - Textos para um Novo Mapa
. Teresa Rita Lopes. Lisboa: Estampa, 1990.
- 153.

Compromisso entre Alexander Search, residente no Inferno, Nenhures, e Jacob Satanás, senhor, embora não rei, do mesmo lugar:
1. Nunca esmorecer nem recuar no propósito de fazer bem à humanidade.
2. Nunca escrever coisas sensuais, ou más a qualquer outro respeito, que possam lesar e prejudicar quem as ler.
3. Nunca esquecer, ao atacar a religião em nome da verdade, que a religião dificilmente pode ser substituída e que o pobre ser humano chora nas trevas.
4. Nunca esquecer o sofrimento e o padecimento dos homens.
+ A marca de Satanás.
2 de Outubro de 1907
Alexander Search
1907
Páginas Íntimas e de Auto-Interpretação. Fernando Pessoa. (Textos estabelecidos e prefaciados por Georg Rudolf Lind e Jacinto do Prado Coelho.) Lisboa: Ática, 1966.
- 10.
Trad.: Jorge Rosa

EPIGRAMS
II
To all those people that say
That honour and good are dead
Many things might well be said;
One of them is that they be.
12-10-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 182.

EPIGRAMS
III
If rank [?] the guinea‑stamp but be,
Why, to this one thing may be said:
That 'tis only midst men we see
A guinea‑stamp on head [?]
15-10-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 182.

EPIGRAMS
IV
You tell me, for oft you choose
Rude and uncourteous to grow,
I can't say «Bo» to a goose...
Why, James: Bo!
15-10-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 182.

EPIGRAMS
V
What is the best‑named thing in all
The world? Why, this: A papal bull.
16-10-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 182.

EPIGRAMS
VI
Pius, of pious anger full,
In's bull makes priests and men of bias
Spy us. Although Pius is pious,
His bull (if that's a bull) 's a bull.
16-10-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 182.

EPIGRAMS
VII
Pius the Tenth, your letter, bull -
Whate'er it is, with great attention
I read, although 'tis rather dull;
And, to speak true, not to deceive,
These words synthetise the impression
That from your bull I did receive: -
How much of that do you believe?
16-10-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 184.

EPIGRAMS
VIII
He asked me, half in his fine compassion,
To sketch in two strokes his portrait high;
'Tis done: a coat strikingly in fashion
And a red tie.
12-1905
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 184.

EPIGRAMS
IX
They say that all roads lead to Rome,
And, what's more, it is true;
But it is clear most of them must
Lead crookedly thereto.
24-10-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 184.

MEANINGLESS LlNES
I became good, and was despised.
I became bad; I hated was.
If good or bad I was not prized,
In good or evil, equal loss.
I became bad and good by turns,
And thus did but unite two ills.
The spleen that now within me burns
Therefrom, nor good nor evil stills.
24-10-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 184.
Destinado ao conjunto «Documents of Mental Decadence».

ON THE ROAD
In a cart.
Here we go while morning life burns
In the sunlight's golden ocean,
And upon our faces a freshness comes,
A freshness whose soul is motion.
Up the hills, up! Down to the vales!
Now in the plains more slow!
Now in swift turns the shaken cart reels.
Soundless in sand now we go!
But we must come to some village or town,
And our eyes show sorrow at it.
Could we for ever and ever go on
In the sun and air that we hit;
On an infinite road, at a mighty pace,
With endless and free commotion,
With the sun eter round us and on our face
A freshness whose soul is motion!
26-10-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 186.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium».

ENTREVISTA COM A [ LBERTO ]  C [ AEIRO ]
Entre as muitas sensações de arte que devo a esta cidade de Vigo, sou-lhe grato pelo encontro que aqui acabo de ter com o nosso mais recente, e sem dúvida o mais original, dos nossos poetas.
Mão amiga me havia mandado desde Portugal, para suavização talvez, do meu exílio, o livro de Alb[erto ]  Caeiro. Li-o aqui, a esta janela, como ele o quereria, tendo diante dos meus olhos extasiados o (...) da baía de Vigo. E não posso ter senão por providencial que um acaso feliz me proporcionasse, tão cedo empós a leitura, travar conhecimento com o poeta glorioso.
Apresentou-nos um amigo comum. E à noite, ao jantar, na sala (...) do Hotel (...), eu tive com o poeta esta conversa, que eu ansiei poder converter-se em entrevista.
Eu dissera-lhe da minha admiração perante a sua obra. Ele escutára-me como quem recebe o que lhe é devido, com aquele orgulho espantoso e fresco que é um dos maiores atractivos do homem, por quem, de supor é, lhe reconheça o direito a ele. E ninguém mais do que eu lho reconhece. Extraordinariamente lho reconhece.
Sobre o café a conversa pôde intelectualizar-se por completo. Consegui levá-la, sem custo, para um único ponto, o que me interessava, o livro de Caeiro. Pude ouvir-lhe as opiniões que transcrevo, e que, não sendo, claro é, toda a conversa, muito representam, contudo, do que se disse.
O poeta fala de si e da sua obra com uma espécie de religiosidade e de natural elevação que, talvez, noutros com menos direitos a falar assim, parecessem francamente insuportáveis. Fala sempre com frases objectivas, excessivamente sintéticas, censurando ou admirando (raro admira, porém) com absolutismo, despoticamente, como se não estivesse dando uma opinião, mas dizendo a verdade intangível.
Creio que foi pela altura em que lhe disse da minha desorientação primitiva em face da novidade do seu livro que a conversa tomou aquele aspecto que mais me apraz transcrever aqui.
O amigo que me enviou o seu livro disse-me que ele era    renascente,    isto é, filiado na corrente da R[enascença ]  P [ ortuguesa ]  mas eu não creio...
-  E faz muito bem. Se há gente que seja indigna [? ]  da minha obra é essa.
O seu amigo insultou-me sem me conhecer comparando-me a essa gente. Eles
são místicos. Eu o menos que sou é místico. Que há entre mim e eles? Nem
o sermos poetas, porque eles o não são. Quando leio Pascoaes farto-me de rir.
Nunca fui capaz de ler uma coisa dele até ao fim. Um homem que descobre
sentidos ocultos nas pedras, sentimentos humanos nas árvores, que faz gente dos montes e das madrugadas (...)É como um idiota belga dum Verharen, que um amigo meu, com quem fiquei mal por isso, me quis ler. Esse então é inacreditável.
-  A essa corrente pertence, penso, a Or[ação] à L[uz] de Junqueiro.
-  Nem poderia deixar de ser. Basta ser tão má. O Junqueiro não é um poeta. É um [... ]  de frases. Tudo nele é ritmo e métrica. A sua religiosidade é uma coisa. A sua admiração da natureza é outra coisa. Pode alguém tomar a sério um tipo que diz que é (...) da luz misteriosa juntinho ao altar de Deus. Isto não quer dizer nada. É com coisas que não querem dizer nada,    excessivamente nada,    que as pessoas têm feito obra até agora. É preciso acabar com isso.
-  E João de Barros?
-  Qual? O contemporâneo... A personagem não me interessa. Detesto-a, como o futuro e o destino. A única coisa boa que há em qualquer pessoa é o que ela não sabe.
s.d.
Pessoa por Conhecer - Textos para um Novo Mapa
. Teresa Rita Lopes. Lisboa: Estampa, 1990.
- 359.

«Sou mesmo o primeiro poeta que se lembrou de que a Natureza existe. Os outros poetas têm cantado a N[atureza] submetendo-a a eles como se eles fossem Deus; eu canto a N[atureza] submetendo-me a ela, porque nada me indica que eu sou superior a ela, visto que ela me inclui, que eu nasço dela e que (...)
O meu materialismo é um materialismo espontâneo. Sou profundamente e constantemente ateu e materialista. Não houve nunca, na verdade, um materialista e um ateu como eu... Mas isso é porque o mat[erialis]mo e o at[eísmo] só agora, em mim, encontram o seu poeta.» E A. C. de tão curioso modo acentua o eu, o
mim
que só vê a falsa natureza em que fala.
Dizia-me há tempos esse altíssimo e transviado  [ ?] espírito que é Fernando Pessoa (…)
s.d.
Pessoa por Conhecer - Textos para um Novo Mapa
. Teresa Rita Lopes. Lisboa: Estampa, 1990.
- 360.
Entrevista com Alberto Caeiro

LITTLE BIRD
Poet
Little bird, sing me a sweet song deep
Of what is not to‑day;
Be it not the future that yet doth sleep
In the hall where Time his hours doth keep,
More than far away.
Sing me a song of the things thou knew'st
And desirest e'er,
Be it a song to which but is used
The heart that has to love refused
What is merely fair.
Bird
Young, too young hither I was brought
From the dells and trees;
Weep with me - I remember them not
Save with a vague and a pining thought:
Can I sing of these?
Poet
Sing, little bird, sing me that song -­
None can be more dear -
Come of the spirit that doth long
Not for the past with a sadness strong,
But for what was never here.
Sing me, sing me that song, little bird;
I would also sing
Of sounds I remember yet never heard,
Of wishes by which my soul is stirred
Till then bliss doth sting.
Bird
To breathe that singing I have no might;
Sing it deeply thou!
I sing when the day is clear and bright
And when the moon is so much in night
That thy tears do flow.
But thou, thou sing'st in woe, in ill,
And thy voice is fit
To speak of what the wish doth fill
With pinings indescribable,
Shadows vague of it.
Poet
Ay, little bird, let us sing in all weather
A song, of to‑day,
Come of the sense we feel together
That nothing that doth die and wither
Truly goes away.
10-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 158.
Destinado ao volume «Agony» [?].

Many an evil, many a bliss
Go to make existence' hell,
But the greatest evil of all is this:
To live and to know it  well.
Since this from life at once we see
Thus simply gathered,
Must not the greatest bliss then be
To die and know oneself dead?
That's true, as far as I guess,
That's true and impossible,
As far as I know and tell.
So much for happiness!
10-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 160.

THE WORLD OFFENDED
I said unto the world one day:
«I suspect thee of existence!»
And the world showed a smiled resistance
To what I did say.
«Let us go to court», he replied; «go we
Before a Court both wise and rare.
Let  Reason  one judge of our cause be;
Imagination  be also there
And  Feeling  the judges our cause to hear.»
We went before the Court, and  Reason
Said to me: « Thy  crime is half‑treason!
The World's acquitted of what thou say'st:
Of existence 'tis guilty not.
This by the written code of Thought
In the pages of Unrest.»
(I was but in the costs condemned
Of the suit I lost as play;
But those, they leave me poor and yet
Are more than I can pay.)
10-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 160.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium».

A QUESTION
«Tell me», one day to a poet said
A deep, brutal man,
«If you had to choose between seeing dead
Your wife whom you do love so well
And the loss complete, irreparable,
Of your verses all, instead -
Which loss would you rather feel?»
The poet glanced with sudden woe
And deep distress at him who so
Broke with a question ill‑foreseen
His inner silence half‑serene,
And he did not answer; and the other
Smiled, as elder to younger brother:
The tortured glance of startled sense
And sudden self‑knowledge intense
And newness of self‑consciousness
Was bitter, as ev'n he could guess.
More than a smile were violence.
10-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 162.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium».

A CRIME
Do you know the crime I committed
Nearly twenty years ago?
At that crime my heart is torn.
What my crime was do you know?
'T was the crime of being born.
And every day another crime
I commit, and ever have done
Up to now in the face of Time.
Do you know what crime this is?
'Tis the crime of living on.
Do you know what evil's disgrace
Has made an outcast's my lot
And sundered me from my race?
Do you know what crime is that?
'Tis the crime of having thought.
11-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 164.
Destinado ao conjunto «Documents of Mental Decadence».

THE BELLS
Ring, bells, ring - ring out clear!
Perhaps by the vague sentiment that you raise -
I know not why - you remind me of my infancy.
Ring, bells, ring! Your soul is a tear.
What does it matter? My childhood's glee -
You cannot call it back to me.
Ring, bells, ring out your song!
You remind me of some happiness
(Perhaps one that I never felt),
Of what has been, of what lasts not long,
Of what was not but seems now a bliss.
Something of sorrow, something of despair
Is in me by your melody.
Sing, sing of the past which was fair -
You cannot call it back to me.
Though you sing but your set melody,
Yet ring out wildly, wildly, bells!
Ring out the song that tears out the heart,
Speaking of what I know not, sing
To and fro till the soul's deep smart
Calms itself by too much, too deep in the heart.
In the wordless speech of your own
Ring out, wild bells, ring out!
Ye have something of souls left alone;
Ye give me a sorrow, a deep ache of doubt,
Ununderstood sentiment sad...
Do you sing of my childhood that thus you should moan?
Then I was unconscious; now I am mad.
Ring out bells! Your sadness that stings
Has a sob as an inner sound.
I have in me colossal things.
Ring on! in your music I am drowned.
All in the world has a limit and bound.
Ring on, desperate and free!
Can ye not of skies and of wings
Speak loud to my misery?
Speak an ye will; except sorrow and pain
Ye bring not anything to me.
Ring out, wild bells, clearly, deep!
Whatever the pain ye sing of may be -
What does it matter? Life, death are one sleep
Full of dreams of agony.
All is unreal and we blind.
Ring out your song! I desire to weep
For all that my life might be.
All that you call or recall to my mind
You cannot bring nor bring back to me.
16-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 164.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium».

PRAYER
Oh God, if Thou be'st anything
Hear this frail prayer that I fling
Like a flame leaping past control
From out the hell that is my soul:
Oh God, let me not fall insane!
I know that half‑mad I am now;
I feel behind my youthful brow
Horrors it sickens to contain,
Ideas that my sense deride
And inhibition cast aside;
I feel each day, every day
At least in one deep moment's hell
My consciousness completely stay
My reason like a vision reel.
Let me not be insane, my God,
Torture me in all ways beside,
But let me keep, otherwise trod
Under the foot of Time, and tried
In all the horrors that men know,
A little portion of the sense
Of things that full is normal men's.
Seclude me not completely, no,
From men in an unconscious woe.
I suffer much, yet let me not,
Though thus I suffered not at all,
Pass into emptiness of thought,
To madness deep which is a gall
Filling the soul till bitterness,
Becoming part of us, doth steep
The whole soul in unconsciousness.
A little sense, oh, let me keep!
Pour down on me all woes, all ills
All else that the strain'd spirit fills.
With horror and with terror mute;
But madness, madness absolute,
Keep from my trembling mind away.
The pain that withers and that kills,
The love that tears to shreds the heart,
The cares that horror and that may
Give death with an ignoble smart -
All these may come, but oh, let me
From madness true keep ever free.
No more - who knows but as I write
Madness in me is not complete?
Who knows, who can see things aright?
Where is the true unerring sight
Its own deep ills to meet?
Who knows but I am mad e'en now?
Oh, torture horrible to know!
Who knows but when unconscious I
Or thinking that I dream pass by,
People say not: «there goes the youth That is a madman» all in truth?
Who tells me that while now I think
That genius I possess and have,
That inspiration I do drink
Of all before, beyond the grave,
I do not rave, entirely rave?
Who knows, who anything can tell? -
My brain is reeling as I write
Void am I and anxious of light -
That I am not in madness quite...
Oh doubt, oh agony, soul‑hell!
No more, no more; let me believe
That I am sane, and, oh God, hear
Whate'er thou beest, my true prayer
Shaken from my soul's giant fear...
Torture me in all ways that are,
Let me be scorned and crushed and trod,
Plunged in full conscious agony,
Let me become a fear, a care,
But madness, madness, oh my God,
Do not let madness come to me!
18-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 166.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».

MOMENTS
I
The hen said «I can fly».
Do you know why?
Over a fence she flew.
The eagle said «Can I fly?»
Can you tell why?
Unto the stars she could not go.
28-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 170.

MOMENTS
II
Baby came into the world.
In a basket full of flowers
Which a fairy brought, an angel
From the paradisal bowers.
28-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 172.

MOMENTS
III
A philosopher of name
In the best of mind once said:
«Man is... » the rest is immaterial
And need not be chronicled.
18-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 172.

INACTION
A thousand hearts are labouring for the good
Of poor mankind ill-civilized and chill;
A thousand minds are making war to ill
With thought or feeling ponderate or rude.
And I alone, as if not understood
By me the suffering that the sense doth fill,
Am sunk in an abeyance deep of will
In a wild, crazy somnolence of mood.
Thus show I mute and cold to misery
Yet not suspected thoughts like dim clouds float,
The presages of horrors, in my mind.
Thus am I miserable and my soul in me,
A skilful helmsman in a helmless boat,
Is like one loving beauty yet born blind.
23-9-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 114.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».

Never have I so deeply felt my exclusion from mankind.
To one side the sane, to the other side the lame and the halt and the blind;
To one side the healthy, the good, the strong, those in life's prime,
To the other side the slaves of genius, of madness, of crime.
Build prisons and hospitals and Bedlams. To one side the glad,
To the other side the sickly, the stupid, the ill and the mad.
At no time have I felt so deep the gulf between me and men.
Is it idiocy, madness or crime, or genius - or what is this pain?
I have felt it to-day with full truth and have felt to remember it well:
I am one thrown aside ‑ a torturer and tortured in my being's hell;
Yet I asked not to live, nor had choice of my living's rotten worth,
I had no power on my life, nor am I guilty of my birth.
So I shall sing my song without hope, cheerless and forlorn,
That men may learn - at least they may laugh - to what some hearts are born;
Song all mystery, all symbols, contradictions in ignoble dance,
But that this is madness complete not the smallest ignorance;
Song all of tortures of soul, of a being's human abysm
And never a doubt but this is but raving egotism;
Song of evil, song of hate, song of revolt, song of love
Of Nature, of Mother Nature, the earth at my feet and the sky above;
Song of the hatred of customs, of creeds, of conventions, of institutions
Song of madness unpondering to human prostitutions;
Song of one that better were dead, song of one set aside,
Song of one that hell and earth conspired and combined to deride.
Peace! let the sane be set on that side and the mad on this side.
16-10-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 114.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».
1ª publ.: «Fernando Pessoa e a Loucura» e «A Poesia Juvenil de Fernando Pessoa». Georg Rudolf Lind. in  Estudos sobre Fernando Pessoa . Lisboa: Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda, 1981.

HORROR
In the darkness of my soul,
Just as dark as the souls of men,
By the blessing of their eternal curse,
Flashes like a bodiless ghoul,
In its rare fulness above all ken,
The sense of the sense of the universe.
And such a cowardice of thought,
Absorbing all my life and all
I have in me, more gall than gall,
Takes me, that I fear to open my eyes
And my mind to a most horrid surprise,
And I feel my being near to suppression
In a horror past Fancy's confession.
More than the cowardest of beasts
Before a gaping flash overhead,
More than the drunkard in his unrests
Who sees visions of more than dread,
More than all that fear can conceive,
More than madness can make to believe,
More than cannot be imagined,
The sense of the mystery of all,
When it flashes on me full as can be,
Doth my maddened soul appal.
Speak it not ‑ nor can it be spoken, -
No, not the shadow of the sensation,
Of the chord of sanity that is broken
In me by that moment's distress
And intensity of negation;
Think it not, thought is powerless
This horror less than to express.
The meanest thing grows terrible
And the basest thought sublime -
All in a world more horrible
Than the sense of the soul of time,
Than the fear of the depth of death,
Than the remorse of more than crime.
‘Tis half as if its solution it brought,
That mystery that foul is as rot.
Yet if it did so bring
Dead were my thought
And my whole self dead as any thing:
'Tis this that coarsely men can name,
Looking on the face of God.
And that feeling, that sense can more than maim
The spirit, more than make it a clod;
It would kill outright straight, outright,
With a shock of which hell is no mirror,
More than is known in terror,
More than is dreamt of fright.
17-10-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 116.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium». 1ª publ. in  Estudos sobre Fernando Pessoa . Lisboa: Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda, 1981.

ASPIRATION
Joyless seeing me to be
Mother Nature asked of me:
«What desirest thou?
Whence comes this thy misery?
Whence the sadness on thy brow?
Tell me what thy wish is.»
- «To give it thou art powerless.
Something lovelier than love,
Bluer than the sky above,
Truer than the truth we have
Something better than the grave,
Aught that in the soul has root,
Something that no mistress' kiss
Nor mother's love can substitute.
But I, dreaming, do pollute
With my dream its object's day.»
In the silence absolute
Of my soul I hear it say:
´'Love can make me but to weep,
Glory maketh me but pine.
Give the world with my keep,
And still nothing will be mine.'»
- «But what feelest thou in thee?»
- «Hope and misery the first,
Then despair and misery.
´Oh, it is a desire, a thirst
The limits of my soul to burst,
To spring outside my consciousness,
I know not how nor why;
A wish with moonlight wings to fly
Past the high walls of distress.
Lifting my most daring flight
Up, far up, beyond all night,
More than eagles fly in air
Would I in that atmosphere.
«Something more near to me in space
Than my body is. In fine
Something than myself more mine.
Something (in what words to trace
Its nature?) nearer in its bliss
To me than my own consciousness.
The Something I desire is this.
It is further than far away
And yet (its nature how to find?)
Closer to me than my mind,
Nearer to me than to-day.»
22-10-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 120.

SONG OF THE LEPER
He was a nauseous leper
Who in the ruins was;
There ever and anon
The hollow wind did pass,
And wild and feeble and yellow all
Was the grass.
And the leper sang this song:
«The leper is excluded from his race,
The leper is driven out,
The leper is thrust out
From hall and street and way;
He must not show his face
Where human beings may.
For him there are whips and stones;
He cannot even stay
Where mongrels fight for bones
And are allowed to play.
«No beast as the poor leper is
Worms and snakes have greater bliss.
But the leper is accurst
And he knows that well accurst
Is he because a nauseous leper,
Of evil things the worst.
«The toad, the newt, the viper
Are tolerate and borne,
But the vile and nauseous leper
Makes vomit in deep scorn;
Repugnance is for him
Inevitably born
«Sometimes he hears the laughter
Of human feast to come,
And music followed, after
By sounds of peace and of home.
Upon the wind they stray,
The wind bears them away,
And the nauseous leper, he remains,
Through night, through day,
Alone with his sores, with his pains.
And bands of strollers pass,
Taking the road afar,
For in the ruins they know well
The leper's sores there are.
And if perchance they see
The leper from their way,
He sees their finger point
And he knows that they say:
«He is the nauseous leper
Who in the ruins doth sit;
He is viler than the plague,
More loathsome far than it;
If near to him we dared do come
Upon him we would spit.»
«Poor leper who is a man,
Poor leper who is alive,
Under his being's ban,
Whose torture's chain unearned
No pity comes to rive.
«A Hand of Might created
The newt, the toad, the viper,
But gave them not its worst;
Kept them from loneliness,
Gave them their kindred's bliss.
But that hand made the leper
And it made the leper leper:
And that Hand Almighty is
Of all things the most curst.
25-10-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 122.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».

IN THE STREET
I pass before the windows lit
With inward, curtained light,
And in the houses I see flit
Now and again shadows that hit
The curtain's yellowed white.
Others a little gleam but show:
Inside, the people chat, I know.
And I feel cold and feel alone,
Not that I no one have,
But - ah that dreams should ne’er be done! -
That among many I am one,
As among flowers a grave;
One, and more lonely than can be
Imagined conceivably.
If l were born not to aspire
Beyond the life that lead
These people whom life cannot tire,
Who chat and slumber by the fire
Contentedly indeed,
Behind those curtains, by that light
That to the street is somewhat bright;
Could I no more aspire than these,
Were all my wishes bound
In family or social ease,
In worldly, usual jollities
Or children playing round,
Happy were I but to have then
The usual life of usual men.
But oh! I have within my heart
Things that cannot keep still -
A mystic and delirious smart
That doth a restlessness impart,
An ache, a woe, an ill;
I wearied Sysyphus I groan
Against the world's ironic stone.
I, the eternally excluded
From socialness and mirth,
The aching heart whose mind has brooded
Till thought turned raving mad hath flooded
The soul that gave it birth ­-
I weep to know I have in me
Aught at once joy and misery.
And cold before the normal, cold
And fear‑struck I remain,
As one old, formidably old,
Who doth portentous secrets hold
That he cannot explain
But which the world's show doth suggest
Unto his mind that knows not rest.
How good after dinner to chat
And sit in half a sleep,
Without a duty‑sense to strike flat
All ease, all cosiness to abate
An aspiration deep;
To have an ease no pains do throng
Nor felt as an ease that is wrong.
A home, a rest, a child, a wife ­-
None of these are for me
Who wish for aught beyond this life
With an incessant inner strife
That knows not victory.
Ay me! and none to comprehend
This wish that doth all things transcend.
Some in some theatre are away
Or other place of joy
And keep, for ever glad and gay,
The hounds of thought and care at bay
That cannot laugh or toy:
These are awaited in some homes,
A faint light from their windows comes.
A cosiness these homes must steep
In something like a slumber,
And in that surface‑living deep
'Tis hard to know that hearts do keep.
......
Yet these are normal; I that sigh
And dread their living - what am I?
Oh joy! oh height of happiness!
To wish no more than life,
To feel of pleasure, of distress,
A normal more, a normal less,
By friend or child or wife!
None of these for my soul can be
For more than madness is in me.
I weep sad tears - oh, not to live
As these in human joy!
Oh, that I could as much believe
As sense and custom joint can give
Which living cannot cloy!
Man's happiness is poor, I know,
But true - a thing all unlike woe.
Sometimes I dream that I might sit
By my own fire, and quiet
Might see my wife and children flit
Half in a sleep and not a whit
In one of dreamy riot;
And I might noble be and pure
In mind, not stupid or obscure.
Sometimes I dream one of these homes
Secluded socially
One for the many thousand tomes
Of life might keep my heart that roams
Weak, desolate and free;
That quiet haply might console
My aching heart, my pining soul.
But as the thought of such a glad
Existence simple here,
As if the thing a venom had
I shiver, tremble and grow sad
As with a mystic fear;
I dread to think my life might pass
Like that of men, as is and was.
I dread to think of a life sweet
By family and friends.
Mine eyes the finite that they meet
Abhor - the houses and the street.
And all things that have ends.
I know not to what I aspire,
Yet know this I cannot desire.
So always incompatible
And by the usual cold,
I go about, my own deep hell,
Hearing to toll in me the bell
That tells me I grow old,
Yet this in such an accent strange
lt bears the mystery of Change.
And so - alas! must e'er I be
A stranger everywhere;
The leper in his leprosy
In his exclusion nears not me
Who cannot living bear:
The world my home, my brother men
Are prisons, chains that bind and pen.
I pass. The windows are behind,
And I forget their peace,
But tremble yet at what my mind
Conceives and feels; and in the wind
I wander without cease,
Glad yet sad in me to perceive
Something none other can conceive.
12-11-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 126.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».
1ª publ.:  «Alexander Search entre o Sono e o Sonho». Stephen Reckert. in Yvette K. Centeno e Stephen Reckert.  Fernando Pessoa (Tempo, Solidão, Hermetismo) . Lisboa: Moraes Ed., 1978.

RAGE
I feel a rage - ay, a rage!
At time that passes, passes away,
A thirst of life nought can assuage,
An anger that nothing can stay.
And every hour that passes by
And merges into night a day
Makes, when I think, my soul to cry:
«Torture eternal, torture without end!
All days pass and not a deed!
A desire strong as a greed
By an ill of will - oh, misery!
To be a dream of pain condemned!»
I feel a rage! 'tis to feel
Mystery and sadness at one time,
Till the maddened brain doth reel,
Looking on that bodiless curse.
The passing of the world, as one
Paralytic at a deed of blood
Which he hath no power to avert.
I feel a stranger before the sun,
A weeper before field and flood,
A cynic before dirt,
A revolt before God.
3-12-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 132.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».

SONG OF DIRT
Come, let us speak of dirt!
God's curse is on our head.
Let our lips irreverence blurt!
We are sufferers all; let us, instead
Of prayer, offer God the sacrifice
Of our minds that he curst with crime and vice,
Of our frames that diseases make dread!
Let us offer the tyrant of all,
To hang in the hall of his palace of pain,
A funeral pall,
And a bride's white dress with a stain,
And a widow's weeds, and the crumpled sheets
From the bed of the wife.
Let them be symbols of human strife!
Give we God the dirt of the streets
Of our spirit, made mud with our tears,
The dust of our joys, the mire of our fears,
And the rot of our life!
4-12-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 134.
Destinado ao volume «Death of God».

THE GIANTESS
I saw a comic giantess
At a tremendous feast alone,
Striving to eat some gorgeous mess
That formed a hard whole, as a stone.
But for her mouth it was too much
That, her avidity being such,
It doubled her void wish's hell;
And her mouth's wide, impotent clutch
Would have made laugh, did it not quell
Laughter with being horrible.
At her impossible, void feast
I saw her and, seeing her despair,
«What's that too large thing that to eat
You idly strive?» I asked of her ;
And I laughed out serene and rude.
She wept wild tears and said, «This meat
That by its greatness doth elude
My constant gaping, wild and sore,
Is Beauty whole and complete.»
I looked at her and laughed no more,
But I wept, for I understood.
6-12-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 136.
1ª publ. in «A Filosofia Hermética na obra de Fernando Pessoa». Yvette K. Centeno. in  Fernando Pessoa: os Trezentos e outros Ensaios . Lisboa: Presença, 1988.

BUILD ME A COTTAGE...
Build me a cottage deep
In a forest, a simple, silent home,
Like a breath in a sleep,
Where all wish may be never to roam
And a pleasure all smallness may keep.
A palace high then build,
With confusion of lights and of rooms,
A strange sense to yield,
Whither my desire from the cottage's glooms
May go, to return, unfulfilled.
Then dig me a grave,
That what cottage nor palace can give
I at length may have,
That the weariness of all ways to live
May cease like the last of a wave.
20-12-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 138.

NIRVANA
A non-existence deeply within Being,
A sentient nothingness ethereal,
A more than real Ideality, agreeing
Of subject and of object, all in all.
Nor Life, nor Death, nor sense nor senselessness,
But a deep feeling of not feeling aught;
A calm how deep! ‑ much deeper than distress,
Haply as thinking is without the thought.
Beauty and ugliness, and love and hate,
Virtue and vice ‑ all these nowise will be;
That peace all quiet shall eliminate
Our everlasting life ‑ uncertainty.
A quietness of all our human hopes,
An end as of a feverish, tired breath...
For fit expressions vainly the soul gropes;
It is beyond the logic of our faith.
An opposite of joy's stir, of the deep
Disconsolation that our life doth give,
A waking to the slumber that we sleep,
A sleeping to the living that we live.
All difference unto the life we have,
All other to the thoughts that through us roam;
It is a home if our life be a grave,
It is a grave if our life be a home.
All that we weep, all to which we aspire
Is there, and like an infant on the breast,
We shall e'er be with more than we desire
And our accursed souls at last shall rest.
1906
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 84.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium». 1ª publ.: «O Espólio  e a Biblioteca de Fernando Pessoa: uma solução para alguns enigmas». Yvette. K. Centeno. in Yvette. K. Centeno e Stephen Reckert.  Fernando Pessoa (Tempo. Solidão. Hermetismo) . Lisboa: Moraes, 1978.

THE UNNATURAL AND THE STRANGE
The unnatural and the strange
Have a perfume of their own
Full of the constancy in chance,
Of the smile at heart a groan:
The unnatural and the strange
Have a perfume of their own.
Flowers are they in a vase
Of no human workmanship,
The unnatural that dismays
And the strange strong as a whip:
Flowers are they in a vase
Of no human workmanship.
They have the scent of troubled peace,
Of disturbed halls of joy,
This the scent they have, which is
A thing half to sting and cloy:
They have the scent of troubled peace,
Of disturbed halls of joy.
The unnatural and the strange
Have a perfume of their own
That of human flesh, of change
Made corruption without moan:
The unnatural and the strange
Have a perfume of their own.
1906
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 86.

SONG
Sun to-day and storm to-morrow.
Never can we know
When is joy or when is sorrow,
Happiness or woe...
The clock strikes. To-day is gone.
Man, proud man, oh think thereon!
From delight we pass to sadness
From a smile to tears;
And the boldness of our gladness
Dies within our fears.
The clock strikes. An hour is past.
Think, oh think, how all doth waste!
1906
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 88.
Destinado ao volume «Death of God».

THE VULTURES
Oh, vultures that this bleak land shows
Where, the wild wind with fury blows,
What are those bones beneath your wing?
- They are Hermagoras, the king.
His queen to another court hath gone,
Another king sits on his throne,
His riches all are in the East,
Elsewhere his courtiers dance and feast.
We have made his rotting flesh our food,
His gentle skin to tear was good;
For his mantle black and his fair array
His servants took as here he lay.
The sun hath bleached his skeleton
And ants and worms do breed thereon,
And those he loved if they go by
Disdain his bones beneath the sky.
13-1-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 39.
Destinado ao volume «Death of God».
1ª publ. in  Fernando Pessoa e a Literatura de Ficção . Maria Leonor Machado de Sousa. Lisboa: Novaera, 1978.

SONNET
Lady, believe me ever at your feet,
When all the Venus in you you condense
Unto a gesture natural and sweet,
Full-filled with purity's white eloquence.
Your sentient arm so softly did incense
The love of beauty in my soul complete,
That I had given the dearest things of sense
For that your gesture natural and sweet.
Genius and beauty, and the things that mar
The love of life with Love's own purest glow,
Out of all thinking, all unconscious are;
And even you, sweet lady, may not know
How much that gesture was to me a star
Leading my bark upon a sea of woe.
3-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 90.

REGRET
I would that I were again a child
And a child you sweet and pure,
That we might be free and wild
In our consciousness obscure;
That we might play fantastic games
Under trees silent and shady,
That we might have fairy-book names,
I be a lord, you a lady.
And all were a strong ignorance
And a healthy want of thought,
And many a [prank?], many a dance
Our unresting feet had wrought;
And I would act well a clown's part
To your childish laughter winning,
And I would call you my sweetheart
And the name would have no meaning.
Or sitting close we each other would move
With tales that now gone are sad;
We would have no sex, would feel no love,
Good without fighting the bad.
And a flower would be our life's delight
And a nutshell boat our treasure:
We would lock it in a cupboard at night
As in memory a pleasure.
We would spend hours and days like a wealth
Of goodness too great to cloy,
We would deep enjoy innocence and health
Knowing not we did enjoy...
Ah, what bitterest is is that-alone
Now one feeling in me I trace -
That knowledge of what from us hath gone
And of what it left in its place.
29-5-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 90.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».
1ª publ. in  Fernando Pessoa: o Amor, a Morte, a Iniciação . Yvette K. Centeno. Lisboa: Regra do Jogo, 1985.

DEATH IN LIFE
Another day is past, and while it past,
What have I pondered or conceived or read?
Nothing! Another day has gone to waste.
Nothing! Each hour as it is born is dead.
I have done nothing. Time from me has fled,
And unto Beauty not a statue raised!
By thought's firm power no creed nor lie debased
By this young useless and wearied.
Is it my lot then ever to remain
Like a grain of sand upon the beach,
A thing at will of wind, at will of sea?
Alas, that aught that wishes and has pain,
Because e'er fall'n from what its power should reach
Less than a thing inanimate should be!
30-5-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 92.
Destinado ao volume «Sonnets in Many Moods».
1ª publ.: «Alexandre em “Busca” de Fernando, ou cinco breves notas sobre a poesia de Alexander Search, seguidas de oito poemas seus e respectivas traduções. » Vasco Graça Moura. in  Actas do 1º Congresso Internacional de Estudos Pessoanos . Porto: Brasília Ed. - Centro de Estudos Pessoanos, 1979.

WOE SUPREME
A friend said once to me: «All that thou writest,
Surely 'tis fancy, and pretence, and feigned;
Surely the moaning wherewith thou affrightest
The healthy mind is preconceived and strained!
´ln all the songs and tales that thou indictest
Why's there no word that is not hard or pained?
Why in good things and true thou not delightest,
But even in youth by thee joys are disdained?»
Because, dear friend, thought to be mad is sweet
Sometimes, and though at others nameless woe,
Yet never human pain the pain can meet
Of the mad brain that doth its madness know;
Because my science learn'd has made complete
The knowledge of an ill that cannot go.
8-6-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 94.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».
1ª publ.: «Fernando Pessoa e a Loucura». Georg Rudolf Lind. in  Estudos sobre Fernando Pessoa . Lisboa: Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda, 1981.

DOUBT
Tell me, tell me who dreams most -
He who sees the world aright
Or the man in dreaming lost?
What is true? What is't that seems -
The lie that's in reality
Or the lie that is in dreams?
Who is unto truth less near -
He who sees all truth a shadow
Or he who sees dreams all clear?
He who is a good guest, or he?
Who feels alien at the feast?
19-6-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 94.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium» e ao conjunto «Documents of Mental Decadence».
1ª publ. in  A metáfora e o fenómeno amoroso nos poemas ingleses de Fernando Pessoa.  Catarina T. S. Edinger. Porto: Brasília Ed., 1982.

ADORNED
Great Venus' statue, as men do conceive,
Wore it a jewel would all spoiled be;
Yet beauty's not alone simplicity.
Thus men with thoughts the eyes of sense deceive.
Oh, on a lake did they never perceive
A perfect boat, or a sail in the sea
At night that passes, far, mysteriously,
And in the heart a pining strange doth leave?
Ah, me! Upon a young and virgin breast
When it a jewel richly doth adorn,
Each to the other lends beauty and splendour,
As o'er the tremulous sea the stars at rest,
As flow'r and dew - but more; my heart is torn
That neither words nor thoughts that spell can render.
19-6-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 96.
Destinado ao volume «Sonnets in Many Moods».

HERE AND THERE
Here is the same as there, my friend,
All places in this world are like.
If doomed thy life in grief to spend,
What change can then thy fate amend,
What from thy soul the pain can strike?
When pain doth wound the tired heart
And grief doth tie the fevered eye,
Some joy indeed the world's great art
May to thy pained soul impart -
What's this if joy in thee not lie?
When on my restless couch I lie
And count the throbbing of my breath,
I see the joy of earth and sky
Yet hate it all; why should not I
So keep my coward mind from death?
True joy comes not from outward show
But in our deepest soul doth rest.
What matter if the sun can glow
And stars at night look sweetly so
When hearts are by their grief opprest?
For when the darkness weighs thy thought,
And night doth fall upon thy soul,
Are not again thy sorrows brought?
Is not thy mind in shadows caught?
Do fears not back upon thee roll?
I cannot do but hope; as mine
Thy mind I see to hopes doth bend;
I in my land and thou in thine
We suffer both - our griefs entwine.
Here is the same as there, my friend.
1904
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 42.

SOUVENIR
How sweetly sad it is sometimes to hear
Some old loved sound to memory recalled,
To see, an if in dreams, some old dear face,
Some landscape's stretch, some field, some dale, some stream
A memory so sudden, sad and pleasant,
Aught that recalls the days of happy youth.
Then spring in happy pain the tears that wait,
Those subtle tears that wait on thought, and all -
Field stream and voice - all that we hear or see -
Goes from the sense, adorned with mem’ry’s hand
And merges slowly into dreamy light.
I wake; alas! by dreams l was betrayed.
Tis but a semblance that l feel and hear
Because the past, alas! cannot return.
These fields are not the fields I knew, these sounds
Are not the sounds I knew: all those are gone,
And all the past - alas! cannot return.
1904
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 44.

THOUGHT
How great a thing is thought! as through the gloom
Of stormy skies the sudden lightning curls,
As slow the storm in patience grim unfurls
Its mighty volume of resounding boom,
Thought comes, more bright than Reason's sun which hurls
Its constant beams around till verge of doom -
Or as the silver‑chequered shades which loom
'Neath Fancy's moon in windy queerest whirls.
Thought comes, but blinds the glaring mental sight,
But shakes our mind with echoes of its roar
And bears its force beyond our visual scope;
Horrible beauty and unpitying might
That often kills and tears, to rise no more,
The frailest fabric of a dreary hope.
1904
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 46.

MEN OF TO‑DAY
Men of to‑day and yester's nought,
Before you were the things we see
Who gave a guess or gave a thought
That such as you to‑day should be?
Ah, passers by the common way,
Who thought of ye before to‑day?
Men of to‑day, to‑morrow's dust,
When years have past where shall ye go?
What vulgar daub or hurried lust [...]
Shall chronicle your joy and woe?
Waves on the crest of life's swift sea,
After to‑day who'll think of ye?
Genius alone can rouse the fire
That in your glorious nature lies;
Genius alone can strike the Iyre
And raise your name to mortal skies;
Genius of death can tear the pall
And yester's nought may be an all.
But virtue, fool, like human tears,
By sand of earth too surely drunk,
Sinks in the dust of passing years,
Nor knowest thou where has it sunk.
Let genius then the laurel wear;
To‑morrow's dust may live for e'er.
1904
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 48.

JOSEPH CHAMBERLAIN
Their blood on thy head, whom the Afric waste
Saw struggling, puppets with unwilful hand,
Brother and brother: their bought souls shall brand
Thine own with horror. Be thy name erased
From the full mouth of men; nor be there traced
To thee one glory to thy parent land;
But'fore us, as'fore God e'er do thou stand
In that thy deed forevermore disgraced.
Where lie the sons and husbands, where those dear
That thy curst craft hath lost? Their drops of blood,
One by one fallen, and many a cadenced tear,
With triple justice weighted trebly dread,
Shall each, rolled onward in a burning flood,
Crush thy dark soul. Their blood be on thy head!
2-1905
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 48.

BEGINNING
Darkness and storm outside make inward gloom,
Quiet and home within and useless pain
Weigh down upon me as a wasted life,
Save where from the vile tomb
Of day there comes a semblance of a strife
Through the blown varying of the pallid rain.
Before the thunder shall the mansion shake
A blankly‑smiling day informs our eyne,
And there is here a ghastness and a gale
That make my frail form quake;
And strange to me who think all things must quail,
A voice is raised in joy ­- alas! not mine.
Why cannot youth be joyous, full of love?
Why am I made the corpse that woes and fears
And problems grim and world‑enigmas dire
Should like a body wove
Close to my nature, in which is a fire
The feverous source of Iying pains and tears?
Blow hard, thou wind; look pale, thou awful day!
Ye cannot in your dread and horror match
The thing that I bear in me and is me,
These idle thoughts that stray
Subordinate to the deep agony
Of him who hears the gate of reason's latch
Fall with a sound of termination,
As of a thing locked past and for e'er done.
3-1905
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 50.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».

RESOLUTION
Why do I waste in dreams fruitless and vain
The substance of my youth in idle tears?.
Why do I count with feverish eye the years
And number with sad heart the ways of pain?
Why should I weep thus, since there is no gain
To me, to men from sighings and from fears?
Since from afar at me the future sneers,
The while the past with me cannot remain.
High Heaven, that errs not and that wills not wrong
To each on earth doth give a work to do,
A distant recompense and rest remote;
I'll to my work then, so God make me strong
To bring the Demons of mine own self to
Their knees, and take the Devil by the throat.
7-5-1905
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 52.
Destinado ao volume «Agony». 1ª publ. in  Fernando Pessoa no Seu Tempo . Lisboa: Biblioteca Nacional, 1988.

TO ENGLAND
(when English journalists joked on Russia’s disasters)
I
How long, oh Lord, shall war and strife be rolled
On the God‑breathing breast of slumbering man,
Horrible nightmares in the doubtful span
Of his sleep blind to heaven? As of old,
Shall we, more wise, in frantic joy behold
The bloody fall of nation and of clan,
And ever others' woes with rough glee scan,
And war’s dark names in Glory's charts inscrolled?
We now that in vile joy our egoist fears
Behold dispelled, one day shall mourn the more
That blood of men erased them‑bitter tears
Of desolated woe, as wept of yore
(Yet not for the short space of ten long years)
The Grecian archer on the Lemnian shore.
II
Our enemies are fallen; other hands
Than ours have struck them, and our joy is great
To know that now at length our fears abate
From hurt and menace on great Eastern lands.
Bardling, scribbler and artist, servile bands,
From covert sneer outsigh their trembling hate,
Laughing at misery, and woe, and fal]en state,
Armies of men whole‑crushed on desolate strands.
The fallen lion every ass can kick,
That in his life, shamed to unmotioned fright,
His every move with eyes askance did trace.
I’ll scorn beseems us, men for war and trick,
Whose groanings nation poured her fullest might
To take the freedom of a former [?] race.
19-6-1905
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 52.
1ª publ. soneto II in  Os Dois Exílios - Fernando Pessoa na África do Sul . H. D. Jennings. Porto: Centro de Estudos Pessoanos, 1984.

LIBERTY
To G.N.
Oh, sacred Liberty, dear mother of Fame!
What are men here that they should expel thee?
What right of theirs, save power, makes others be
The pawns, as if unfeeling, in their game?
Ireland and the Transvaal, ye are a shame
On England and a blot! Oh, shall we see
For ever crushed and held who should be free
By human creatures without human name?
Wonder not then, dear friend, that here where men
Are far away I can well rest, and far
From where in lawful bodies, Christian‑wise,
Beings of earth their fellows fold and pen;
Glad that the winds not yet enchained are
And billows yet are free to fall and rise.
20-6-1905
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 54.

CONVENTION
Mother of slaves and fools, Thou who dost hold
Within Thine iron chains enslaved mankind,
Old in Thy yoke and in their slavery blind,
Harden'd to grief and woo, corrupt and cold,
But in the craven following, as of old,
Of those old ways, unwise, unfirm, unkind,
Bound ever in the animal bonds that bind
Fish, bird and beast in flock and herd and fold.
The light hath fallen of many a cherished name,
And many a land of love hath been the nurse,
But man's worn heart is evermore the same ­-
Unwilling ever to shake off the curse,
Once self‑inflicted, and the time‑grown shame
That loads the weary, lightless universe.
11-1905
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 56.
Destinado ao volume «Death of God».

TO THE CRITIC
To its own father that child fair doth seem
Which unbribed eyes may but indifferent deem;
Therefore this book, my child's first son too dear,
Do thou inspect with careful search austere.
If good, I better promise to indict;
If bad, I will not think thou sayest right.
'Tis not my pride, but human nature, friend,
Owning no wrong doth covertly amend.
1904
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 32.

EPIGRAM
Ah, foolish girl with many a fancy fraught,
Seek not the dreary path of solemn thought.
The man who thinks is he that suffers worst,
By Nature blest, by everything accurst.
Thought is but madness to one thing confined,
A pleasing illness, woeful, undefined;
Pleasing as is the fury of the storm
That swings above its dangerous force enorm;
Pleasing as genius to which one must know
Death will not spare the dreadful, sudden blow;
Of body, soul and happiness the waster,
Thought's a good servant but a tyrannous master.
Leave then to madmen thought and pass thy life
Away from doubt and ceaseless mental strife;
Seek but to please and cherish but to scorn,
Love not with faith or thou must learn to mourn;
Be thy delight in silks and baubles gay,
Treat tears as feints and think life but a play;
Think with thy heart, reserve thy mind to scheme;
Let thine eyes practise an (unreal) dream:
Thy form to attract, thy voice not to repel;
The art of slander see than learn full well;
Try to please women as thou pleasest men...
Thou may'st succeed... and may I live till then.
1904
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 32.

EPIGRAM
When Cynthia smiled all Nature smiled, the streams
Glinted like diamonds in the golden beams;
Upon the branches sang the tuneful birds,
Amid the lowing of the grazing herds.
When Cynthia laughed the world was reft of pain
And varied flowers smiled on the enwitched swain;
The very storm restrained its fitful might,
The seas were ripples and the earth was bright.
If Cynthia frowned the skies gave out a groan,
The earth a shudder and the wind a moan;
Men's heads were drooped, no youthful face was glad,
The flowers had closed, the fields were stern and sad.
If Cynthia railed all Nature's voice was hoarse,
The very orbs withheld their wanted course;
The sun was pale, the moon gave out no light,
All night was hell, all day was like to night.
But, though I lived that day, my blinded eyes
Such many miracles beheld not rise.
Methought the sun preserved his wonted shine
And that men were, as ever, undivine,
Methought the storm went on, nor crash'd the less
And pain also, men suffering without cease;
Nor on the branches sang the birds the more
Nor brightened Nature her too bounteous store;
Nor wandered yet the world, or hung behind,
Nor did the orbs; what wandered was thy mind.
1904
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 34.

SUB UMBRA
As when the moon which on a wide deep stream
Makes every wavelet glint with silver light,
By some black cloud, a shadow of the night
ls but awhile obscured, yet still gleam
The waves in darkness, to no falling beam,
And please in shade with the obscure delight
Of a profounder motion, stilly dight
With softened silver, like a thing of dream;
So may for e'er my song its force retain,
And though a cloud o'ercast my weary mind
Let that but fill the glitter of my strain
With staider sweetness, showing to mankind
That though beneath a cloud I can sustain
My wonted song, to hope and bliss not blind.
8-1904
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 34.

WORK
Thou wast not put on earth to ask
If there be God, or life or death.
Seize then thy tools and to thy task
And give to toil each panting breath.
Thy tools thou hast, nor needst to seek
Thy health or faith or useful art,
The strength to toil, the power to speak,
A mighty mind or kindly heart.
9-1904
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 36.

PERSEVERANCE
Say not that work is e'er ill‑spent,
Say not that effort fails or seems;
Say not that he o'er labour bent
Is one in the world's many dreams.
For not in vain with patient shocks,
With timely rush and quick'ning roar,
The ocean crashes on the rocks
And bounds on to the sounding shore.
They check, ‘tis true, his rolling rush,
His sturdy beat they seem to scorn,
His surging waves with force they crush
And turn in spray his billows torn.
But days and weeks and months and years
He strikes and strikes and strikes amain.
And dent on dent in them appears
That shows his weary, patient gain.
And years may pass or ages go,
Those eaten rocks will smaller stand;
Still he, with measured aim and slow
Shall bend his surging to the land.
Sure as the sun, and unperceived
As is the growing of a tree,
He works and works, nor is deceived
By sturdy from that men can see.
And when his object full he gains
With last and sounding, rending crash,
His mighty power he still sustains
And onward still his waters dash.
9-1904
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 36.

PERFECTION
Perfection comes to me in fevered dreams,
Beauty divine by earthly senses bound,
And lulls mine ear with slow, forgetful sound,
Her full heart's voice, burst forth in mindful gleams,
Such as I ne'er can grasp. Her soft hair streams
On to her lustless breast, wherein confound
The real and the ideal interwound,
And aught of earthly joy that heaven beseems.
Then day invades, and all is gone away;
I to myself return, and feel such woe
As when a ship‑wrecked sailor waked from sleep
From the bright dreams of a sweet village day
Lifts up his throbbing head, to hear below
The weighty, sunken rumble of the deer.
10-1904
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 38.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».
1ª publ. in  Fernando Pessoa no seu Tempo . Lisboa: Biblioteca Nacional, 1988.

THE INTERNAL NATURE OF THE FACULTIES
Every faculty of the mind contains in itself, in a peculiar manner, thought, feeling and volition. Feeling is the desire inherent to the faculty, as, for instance, the desire for sex inherent to amativeness, as the phrenologists call it. Volition is the impulse contained in the faculty whereby we pass to action according to that faculty. Thought is the peculiar consciousness or reflection underlying each feeling and each volition of the faculty. When I feel the desire to love, I do not for instance suppose that I feel the desire to gain applause or approbration. I, and not only I, but also the animal must understand to what the faculty impels. Otherwise all faculties are one. For volition and desire (or feeling) are common to all faculties and manifested in the same way in all; it is then by neither of these that the faculty is determined as such as it is. In other words the faculty to have a name must be capable of understanding itself, so to speak, to determine itself as such a faculty.
(Hence instinct is but the possession of the faculty, of the internal thought).
ALEXANDER SEARCH
1906
Textos Filosóficos
. Vol. I. Fernando Pessoa. (Estabelecidos e prefaciados por António de Pina Coelho.) Lisboa: Ática, 1968 (imp. 1993).
- 171.

Sad lot of all on earth,
Sad and lone!
We go to death from birth
Cheerless in laugh or groan;
And the greatest of us that here must sigh
Is but a meteor hurled on high
From the unknown to the unknown.
1904
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 40.
Destinado ao volume «Nonsense».

— O Sr. Caeiro é um materialista?
— Não, não sou um artista com doutrina [?] nem coisa nenhuma. Sou um homem que um dia, ao abrir a janela, descobriu esta coisa importantíssima: que a natureza existe. Verifiquei que as árvores, os rios, as pedras são coisas que verdadeiramente existem. Nunca ninguém tinha pensado nisto.
Não pretendo ser mais que o maior poeta do mundo. Fiz a maior descoberta que nenhum antes fez e ao pé da qual todas as outras descobertas são entretimentos de crianças estúpidas. Dei pelo universo. Os gregos, com toda a sua nitidez visual, não fizeram tanto.
s.d.
Poemas Completos de Alberto Caeiro . Fernando Pessoa. (Recolha, transcrição e notas de Teresa Sobral Cunha.) Lisboa: Presença,
1994.
- 214.
Entrevista a Alberto Caeiro.

SONNET OF A SCEPTIC
Long ere now Phoebus sunk in western skies
Behind his dreamy hills of tinted rose;
When I in pain my troubled eyelids close
And look upon the world that in me lies.
For in the night the silent river flows,
In darkness hid the bat unheeded flies:
In my soul's night, alas! no calmness lies,
With Nature's night too well my horror grows.
Darkness I hate, for I am like the night,
And yet in me no star, serenely bright,
The clouds of mind and soul so purely clears.
But as night with its pall of shades of old,
Unheard, unseen, l sit in heatless cold,
Enwrapped in my doubts and in my fears.
1904
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 40.

COMEDY
I.
Once in a theatre comic
’Tween acts I pondered to see
On a column sculptured, wide and comic,
The grinning mask of Comedy;
And broad and wild in satyr-glee,
The grinning face of Comedy.
II.
«Ah,» said I, «face merry and comic,
There is happiness in thee,
Few faces like thine, wide-mouth'd and comic,
Oh, grinning face of Comedy;
Boisterously wrinkled, ugly and free,
The grinning mask of Comedy.»
III.
But as I gazed at the face that smiled,
With mine eyes half-dreamfully,
«Ah,» said I, «it is forced and wild,
Untrue smile of pitiless glee;
Forcedly wrinkled, unreal, unfree,
Hard-grinning mask of Comedy.»
IV.
And I trembled — now it no longer smiled,
It had forcedly smiled — now not even so.
Oh, fearful face, terribly wild,
Terribly silent face or woe;
Worn, hysterical, mad, unfree,
Woe-twisted face of Comedy.
1-1906
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 70.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium».

WHEN THE LAMP IS BROKEN...
When the lamp is broken and the shaking
Light is for ever fled,
There is more memory of its breaking
Than of the light it shed.
This may common be, but 'tis not glad;
It means many things and all are sad.
1906
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 71.
Destinado ao volume «Nonsense». 1ª publ. in  Fernando Pessoa no Seu Tempo . Lisboa: Biblioteca Nacional, 1988.

EPITAPH
Here lies who thought himself the best
Of poets in the world's extent;
In life he had nor joy nor rest.
He filled with madness many a song,
And at whatever age he died
Thus many days he lived too long.
He lived in powerless egotism,
His soul tumultuous and disordered
By thought and feeling's endless schism.
In everything he had a be
And without courage bore his part
In life's interminable woe.
He was a slave to grief and fear
And incoherent thoughts he had
And wishes unto madness near.
Those whom he loved, by arts of ill
He treated worse than foes; but he
His own worst enemy was still.
He of himself ever did sing,
Incapable of modesty,
Lock'd in his wild imagining.
Useless was all his toilless trouble
Empty of sense his fears and pains
And many of them were ignoble.
Vile thus and worthless his distress;
His words, though bitterer far than bate,
His bitter soul could not express.
Thus was he miserable and bad,
Who yet could sob in tenderness —
And none was found to know him mad.
Let not a healthy mind pollute
His grave, but fitly there will pass
The traitor and the prostitute;
The drunkard and the wencher there
May pass, but quick, lest they should ponder,
Perchance, that pleasure is but air.
Each weak and execrable mind
Which plagued man with its rottenness
Its conscious master here will find,
Conscious, for in him he could tell
Madness and ill were what they were,
But neither did he will to quell.
Pass by therefore ye who can weep;
Let rottenness work in neglect,
While the rough winds the dead leaves sweep.
His slumbering brother to the sod
Not even in imagining
Disturb not with the name of God.
But let him lie at peace for ever
Far from the eyes and mouths of men
And from what him from them did sever.
He was a thing that God had wrought
And to the sin of having lived
He joined the crime of having thought.
7-1907
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 72.
Destinado ao volume «Agony». 1ª publ.: «A Poesia Juvenil de Fernando Pessoa». Georg Rudolf Lind. in  Estudos sobre Fernando Pessoa . Lisboa: Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda, 1981.

TO MY DEAREST FRIEND
When I am dead you'll write - I know you will -
A thoughtful sonnet on my early death,
In which, stating that life but wearieth,
You'll notice how I lie pale, cold, and still.
This in the quatrains, which likewise you'll fill
With some reflections on how soon goes breath
And how the cold and heavy earth beneath
There is an end to living, good or ill.
After this, in the tercets, you will say
That death's a mystery, that nought doth stay,
Perhaps that immortality is true.
Then you will sign and put the date to it.
And, having read again the sonnet, you
Will be content, seeing it is well writ.
25-2-1909
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 186.
Destinado ao volume «Agony» e ao conjunto «Documents of Mental Decadence».
1ª publ. in «Alexandre em ‘Busca’ de Fernando, ou cinco breves notas sobre a poesia de Alexander Search, seguidas de oito poemas seus e respectivas traduções.» Vasco Graça Moura. In  Actas do 1º Congresso de Estudos Pessoanos . Porto: Brasília Ed. - Centro de Estudos Pessoanos, 1979.

APPROACHING
With dragging steps severe, like creeping hate,
Through the black silence of my conscious brain
I hear madness advance, and feel with pain
The ground it treads on writhe and palpitate.
How to avoid its coming soon or late?
How not to feel the mind's grand vainly strain,
But rooted lie awaiting its dread reign,
That cometh inopposable as Fate?
If only madness came as lightning doth -
Suddenly - that were the least greatest ill...
But oh! to feel with consciousness' clear sight
Reason's day go on to twilight in swift growth,
And the twilight of reason, pale and chill,
Darken towards impenetrable night.
28-3-1909
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 188.
Destinado ao volume «Agony» e ao conjunto «Documents of Mental Decadence».
1ª publ. in «Fernando Pessoa e a Loucura». Georg Rudolf Lind. in  Estudos sobre Fernando Pessoa . Lisboa: Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda, 1981.

TRIFLES
They wear no real greatness who have faith
In God: or Matter, in Life's In or Out.
Only perpetual doubt is truly great,
And the pain of perpetual doubt.
8-5-1909
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 188.

TO A MORALIST
Thou dost say that too soon we grow old,
That all pleasure of earth is but air;
Ay, but tell me, oh moralist cold,
Besides pleasure what pleasure is there?
1-3-1909
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 188.

TO A FRIEND WHO ASKED FOR AN EPITAPH
«He was strong and kind to all mankind,
Strong all temptations through.ª
May this epitaph be written over thee,
And, what's more, may it be true.
23-2-1909
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 190.

TO A MATERIALIST
Thou dost explain by Law the weaving
Of all the world, by Chance ruled ever.
I never thought Law was so living,
Nor did I deem Chance was so clever.
8-5-1909
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 190.

THINGS THAT HAPPEN IN SOCIETY
Apollo married and Hercules married, and this was in real life.
The wife of Hercules loved beautiful rather than strong men,
And strong and not beautiful men was the taste of Apollo's wife.
s.d.
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 190.
1ª publ. in «A Poesia Juvenil de Fernando Pessoa». Georg Rudolf Lind. In  Estudos sobre Fernando Pessoa . Lisboa: Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda, 1981.

ELEGY
On the marriage of my dear friend Mr. Jinks
(but which may with equal aptness be applied
to the marriage of many other gentlemen)
I
Ye nymphs whose beauties all your hills
Adorn,
Embodied graces of the sun‑traced rills,
Mourn;
For gentle Corydon henceforth,
In this hard world where all must pass,
Will feel as icy as the North.
Alas!
II
Ah, Corydon! Ah, Corydon!
And hast thou left all happiness,
Immoraled joy and whiskied liberty?
Ah, Corydon!
Great is our distress.
And art thou no more free?
Bars shall be useless now. Alas! in vain
The music‑hall shall ring with voices known,
In vain the horse shall course the plain
And the struck sparrer groan.
And dogs and beasts and women,
And brandy, gin and wine,
And brutish brutes and human ­-
Oh, say, shall all these joys no more be thine?
lll
Ah, frailness of mankind!
Thou who didst laugh at woman and didst hold
Thyself superior, now, alas! wilt find,
Amid thy waning joy and waning gold,
Thou learnedst in a sorry school
That taught thee to disdain
The seeming‑tender being whose dread rule
Shall now wreak on thee horrid pain.
Too late now wilt thou learn, too late,
When thy voice is low and humble thy gait,
When thy soul is crushed and thy dress sedate,
The greatest of all ills the gods on humans rain.
IV
Ah, what avails all mourning? Thou art gone
From life and youth and gaudy loveliness,
From that deep rest that men call drunkenness.
Ah, Corydon! Ah, Corydon!
Thou the first hope of all our race
Hast left the blessed paths of peace and love.
Ah, wilt thou be content to rove
From shop to shop with her, thy mother‑in‑law,
Or tremble full to hear at night,
With horror deep and deep affright.
The wordy torrent from thy spouse's jaw?
V
Oh, the troubles to come to thee can ever I dare name?
To work in the day, and at night to walk the bedroom's length,
On a seeming‑heavy baby to waste thy seeming‑waning strength,
And as  the husband of thy wife  to reach the light of fame.
Now my voice is broke with weeping, and mine eyes red, as with sand,
And my spirit worn with sighing, and with sighing worn my breast ­
Ah, farewell, that thou art gone now to the dreaded obscure land
Where the wicked cease from troubling and the weary never rest.
1904?
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 192.
N. do A. «C. R. Anon id est Alexander Search»

ON BABY'S DEATH
With the doleful dead man's bell
Ring, oh, ring not Baby's knell!
Let her calmly, calmly sleep,
But with the flow’rs fresh from the dell
Make thou a music wild and deep,
Such as men can but know well
When their souls have learnt to weep.
As if Love's self had gone from earth
Oh, sing a music that has birth
In the suspension of commotion
For thus hath death made our emotion.
Sing thou a song more deep and true
Than the vague, soft song of ocean
The quiet darkness moaning through.
Sing into sad tears our distress!
Oh, let soft sorrow be thy strain!
She's gone beyond our love's caress,
Giving to life more loneliness
And to mystery more pain.
s.d.
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 196.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».

SONG OF THE DREAM‑SPIRITS TO FANNY
From the beach and from the billow
Rapturously loud,
From the zephyr that doth pillow
All his softness on a cloud;
From the murmur of the river,
From the leaves that rustle ever,
Joyously we come.
We are bright and we are many
As the early drops of dew,
And we come to little Fanny
As the day to you;
From the keenness of the mountain,
From the sparkle of the fountain,
Joyously we come.
From the hill and from the valley,
From the mountain and the vale;
From the evening melancholy
Where all hath a tale;
From the sweetness of the meadow,
From the coolness of the shadow,
Joyously we come.
ln the sadness of the willow,
In the homely nest
We have dwelt and had a pillow
In the poet's breast;
And from all things dimly moving
Human souls to bliss and loving
Joyously we come.
s.d.
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 196.
Destinado ao volume «Agony» [?].

THE PICTURE
In a saloon that is a sleep
Mine eyes did a picture meet,
And wondrously wise and woefully deep
And horribly complete.
A profound meaning more than tears
Are seen to give, and human fears,
And human madness and woe,
Come as a scent from that picture weird.
The name of the painter is ignored
And his purpose none do know.
8-1907
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 60.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium» e ao conjunto «Documents of Mental Decadence».

A TEMPLE
I have built my temple — wall and face —
Outside the idea of space,
Complex — built as a full-rigged ship;
I made its walls of my fears,
Its turrets many of weird thoughts and tears —
And that strange temple thus unfurled
Like a death's-head flag, that like a whip
Stinging around my soul is curled,
Is far more real than the world.
8-1907
Pessoa Inédito . Fernando Pessoa. (Orientação, coordenação e prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes). Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1993.
- 61.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium» e ao conjunto «Documents of Mental Decadence».
1ª publ.  Fernando Pessoa no Seu Tempo . Lisboa: Biblioteca Nacional, 1988.

MOMENTS
IV
The boy and the girl did kiss
And the world looked on with joy
At that pure touch of early bliss,
Chaste in its childly stainlessness
Given by the girl to the boy.
'T was the first kiss of youth, and used
The world is to those words abused ­-
«Purity», «love», «free from stain.»
Strange doctor who hath e'er confused
The medulla and the brain!
28-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 172.

MOMENTS
V
The heart's a pump.
s.d.
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 172.

A DAY OF SUN
I love the things that children love
Yet with a comprehension deep
That lifts my pining soul above
Those in which life as yet doth sleep.
All things that simple are and bright,
Unnoticed unto keen‑worn wit,
With a child's natural delight
That makes me proudly weep at it.
I love the sun with personal glee,
The air as if I could embrace
Its wideness with my soul and be
A drunkard by expense of gaze.
I love the heavens with a joy
That makes me wonder at my soul,
It is a pleasure nought can cloy,
A thrilling I cannot control.
So stretched out here let me lie
Before the sun that soaks me up,
And let me gloriously die
Drinking too deep of living's cup;
Be swallowed of the sun and spread
Over the infinite expanse,
Dissolved, like a drop of dew dead
Lost in a super‑normal trance;
Lost in impersonal consciousness
And mingling in all life become
A selfless part of Force and Stress
And have a universal home;
And in a strange way undefined
Lose in the one and living Whole
The limit that I call my mind,
The bounded thing I call my soul.
17-3-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 172.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium».

BE IT SO!
Be it so; we are sundered for ever­ -
I and life's happy and sane.
My nature and theirs did us sever;
Nought can unite us again.
Again? We were never unparted,
Differently destined and born­ -
They born to be light and stout‑hearted,
I to be pained and worn.
Be it so; we for ever are sundered!
What would the normal with me?
My own inner reason hath wondered
Trembling at its misery.
I give me all over to terror
All unto madness and woe;
I yield up my thoughts unto error.
'Twas to be so; be it so!
Of my thoughts I no longer am master,
Ceasing is now all control.
My mind doth decay: take your pasture
Ravings, ye worms of the soul!
20-4-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 174.
Destinado ao conjunto «Documents of Mental Decadence».

TOWARDS THE END
To‑day I sought to write, and found I had
With expectation my worn mind abused,
Yet deemed I not so choked and so confused
My thoughts already should be. I grow mad.
Bare of ideas, lame in my o'er‑used
Uselessly tired reason, feeling bad
Before the light sun, I stand lone and sad,
Friendship and kinship by mankind refused.
I labour but to think. I cannot think.
My thinking raves or sickens into dream
As I of some deep‑witched brew did drink.
That did strange horrors in my soul reveal.
A storm approaches. All grows dark. I feel
My reason leave me like a last sunbeam.
2-7-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 176.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».

FAMILIAR CONVERSATION
Disappointment, my old friend,
I had forgot thou wert with me.
Forgive me. I did half pretend,
Deceiving ill my misery,
That thou hadst gone. Forgive me thou.
Thou old true friend, thou'rt with me now!
Despair, my old companion sure,
Thou too - though not forgotten quite -
Yet for a moment I had fewer
Thoughts of thee - somewhat of respite.
Entirely to forget thee were
Impossible. Friend, thou art here!
And thou, old comrade, Solitude,
Bare of affection and of hope,
Thou twin with me - I were quite rude
Were I to omit by thee to stop
And play the game of cares and fears?...
Why come ye to shame me, oh tears?
6-8-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 178.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium» e ao conjunto «Documents of Mental Decadence».

THE ACCURSED POET
Here the accursed poet lies,
Hid far from the pure blue skies;
Mixed with mud filth he lies
At the bottom of the stream.
He dreamed many a strange dream.
He loved mankind but he did nought
For mankind's good. Vain was his thought.
He would be loved and he was not.
The sun in morn or evening glow
Can reach him not where deep he lies
With mud and filth far from the skies.
He ached to feel, he ached to know.
He did aspire to what should last
Beyond the time that did it show.
Full of the giant city's waste
The river over him doth flow.
Dark over him flows the river.
Down to him no light can go.
Damn'd be he for ever!
6-8-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 178.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium» e ao conjunto «Documents of Mental Decadence».
1ª publ. in «Alexandre em ‘Busca’ de Fernando, ou cinco breves notas sobre a poesia de Alexander Search, seguidas de oito poemas seus e respectivas traduções.» Vasco Graça Moura. In  Actas do 1º Congresso de Estudos Pessoanos . Porto: Brasília Ed. - Centro de Estudos Pessoanos, 1979.

PITY? NO!
Pity? No! I wish not pity.
That were but a bitterer scorn,
Disdain ruthlessly made witty
With a serious look to strain
Its awful joke. No; let me mourn
In peace. Pity me not again!
Pity? No! Let more scorn come,
More indifference, more disdain:
These are the conforts of my home.
To change their look to pity were too far
To make me feel a direr pain.
Pretend not good: it cannot be.
Let evils all seem as they are.
To mask them were a mockery
Heartless and evilly rare.
6-8-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 180.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium» e ao conjunto «Documents of Mental Decadence».
1ª publ. in «Alexandre em ‘Busca’ de Fernando, ou cinco breves notas sobre a poesia de Alexander Search, seguidas de oito poemas seus e respectivas traduções.» Vasco Graça Moura. In  Actas do 1º Congresso de Estudos Pessoanos . Porto: Brasília Ed. - Centro de Estudos Pessoanos, 1979.

FRATERNITY?
I have no reason to love mankind,
Nor, alas! mankind one to love me;
To all its vileness I am not blind,
And all vileness it well can see.
If my hatred in words ne'er wreak
I know, as none do, ununderstood
It is of all men; were I to speak,
As unknown of them remain it would.
So, all in instinct, a mutual hate,
Hid under smiling, we bear each other.
All mankind's kindness well I can rate;
And I hate each man, and call him brother'.
8-9-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 180.
1ª publ. in «Alexandre em ‘Busca’ de Fernando, ou cinco breves notas sobre a poesia de Alexander Search, seguidas de oito poemas seus e respectivas traduções.» Vasco Graça Moura. In  Actas do 1º Congresso de Estudos Pessoanos . Porto: Brasília Ed. - Centro de Estudos Pessoanos, 1979.

EPIGRAMS
I
And so they whisper about us -
About me and about you?
And so they whisper about us?
Let us give them reason to!
11-10-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 182.

THE LAST OF THINGS
Weep for the last of things,
For the farewell that they give
As if with a glance alone
To the things that remain and live.
Weep for the noble minds
That have past like froth away;
Weep for the bodies fair
Now less than dust or day.
Weep for the smallest trifles
Of our life, that is made of them;
Weep for each unaccomplished,
Each dream known at last a dream.
Weep for nations and kingdoms
That are dreams within the past,
For creeds and for religions,
For idols dim down‑cast.
Though their glory were a vile one
And a blessing their decay,
Yet they are things that have been,
Have been and gone away.
Weep for all joys departed,
For many a departed pain:
The heart one day shall desire
That they could come back again.
Weep for all things that are gone
And for those that are not past,
For the heart that sees them knows
That they also shall not last.
To all that passes pertaineth
A shred of our sympathy,
A tear for all things departed,
For departing things a sigh.
27-12-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 138.

ENDINGS
Farewells, departures, goings - these are most sad:
They are endings, dissolutions; they drive sentiment mad.
Even the fall of priests, of tyrants, of slaves and of kings
Has the bitterness and the sadness of the finishing of things.
27-12-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 140.
N. do A.: «Private Poems»

WAS...
The wave hath burst white upon the beach.
Speak no more of it.
The leaf hath rotted. No more can it teach
But a moral for joy unfit.
The day hath ended. Who speaks of its morn
But must think of its night?
The old corpse is rotting. That it was once born
Seems a lie to the sight.
The heart hath broken; no more can it throb
With deep love or care.
Its voice hath vanished; no more can it sob
In its deep despair.
Thus all things do crumble and all doth pass,
But not always forgot:
For we feel it deep, and in the heart «was»
Meaneth but «is nob».
27-12-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 140.

THE MAIDEN
A form of Beauty came once to me,
A sweeter thing than earth or sea
Or anything that is Time's contains
Or shows to our heart that has pains.
It went and I rose to seek it afar,
I walked wide and long in my lofty care,
And I asked the passers‑by on the way:
«Have ye seen this maiden? oh, say! oh, say!»
And they cried all: «No, we have felt the wind
Breathe in the blossom things undefined,
We have seen the soft leaves tremble and kiss
As memories thrilled of a vanished bliss.»
I asked a wanderer by the road:
«Hast thou seen the maiden I seek abroad'?»
«No; I have seen the moonlight», he said,
«Rest like a thought on the graves of the dead.»
And I asked of others: «Know ye the maid
Whose beauty but ignored can fade?»
«No», said they; «than skies and flowers
We know naught fairer that is ours.»
And far I went and I asked of all:
None knew her on whom I did call;
They had felt the breathing of lone winds low
Tremble like lips in loves first glow.
They had seen the grass and the trees and flowers
Bloom as things whose life is but hours;
And they had looked back on their little way
And trees and flowers were in decay.
Then I asked a madman who had no home,
And he said: «Alas for thee who dost roam!
Thou must become as I am now
For her thou seekest none can know.
She lives in a region beyond all love
All human sighing far above;
In a palace there on a dream‑wrought throne
She reigns eternally alone.
She maketh the poet's mind to pine,
She seeketh him once with a kiss divine,
And longing eternal follows that kiss
And pain is the blessing of her caress.»
29-12-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 142.
1ª publ. in «Alexander Search entre o Sono e o Sonho». Stephen Reckert. in Yvette K. Centeno e Stephen Reckert.  Fernando Pessoa (Tempo, Solidão, Hermetismo) . Lisboa: Moraes Ed., 1978.

SUNSET SONG
Leaning my chin on my hands,
I looked far away to sea
Where the dying sunset a sense commands
Of half‑mystical majesty.
And I felt a strange sorrow, a fear,
A desire like a sudden love
For something that is not here
And that I can never have.
1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 144.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».
1ª publ. in «Um Pseudónimo de Fernando Pessoa». Maria Staack. in  Persona , nº 6. Porto: Centro de Estudos Pessoanos, Out. 1981.

THE GAME
Come, let us play a game, little boy,
To while the world away.
What shall be - tell me - our harmless toy?
At what shall we play?
Shall we play - shall we? - at being great?
No, nor at being grand
Shall we believe that we are Fate
And make up lives out of sand?
No, little boy, we will play that we are
Happy, and that we are gay;
Let us pretend we are dreams, very far
From the world in which we play.
2-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 144.
Destinado ao volume «Agony».

PRIEST AND HANGMAN
«Burn me that book well, hangman,
Burn it to the last leaf,
Put at the stake the apostate
Whose hand of truth was thief.
«Burn his house to the ground, man,
Starve his children and wife,
His friends disperse, dissever,
His followers put to the knife.
«His works, his books, his poems
To fire's oblivion fling;
Let ashes remain of all this.
Remains there anything?»
«Some that stand by on looking
Have tears within their eyes.»
«In the stake shall be their ending
And vain and lone their cries.»
«All's done, my lord.» - «Remaineth
There aught that was, of theirs?»
«Ashes» - «Throw them to the winds then;
Still aught of them appears?»
My lord, there still persisteth
The name they had of good.»
Trouble not; t'will be forgotten
As their ashes and their blood.»
«Nothing remaineth. - «My lord, yet
Aught can I not dispel:
Our name that will be ever
A curse and a living hell.»
We also shall be forgotten
As these shall cease to be.
What will remain then? -  My lord, still
The name of Tyranny.»
«That also will remain not.»
«But the Cause of what we do,
Of this bad world will. «What thou meanest
My mind cannot construe.»
My lord, I mean 'tis useless
That all things be crushed and trod.
There will then stand out to be hated
The accursed name of God»
2-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 146.
Destinado ao volume «Death of God».

THE LIP
One day in half‑slumbrous raving
Where I saw strange fancies skip,
I saw in a dream, by no light's gleam,
A man with only one lip -
Absolutely, absolutely, absolutely,
Absolutely with only one lip.
I remember well that he had no face
Nor a nose with a usual tip;
He had nor eyes, nor cheks, nor hair
But only, only  one  lip -
Only one, only one, only one,
Only one, one,  one  lip.
Can ye think of it without terror?
No other lip did slip
Into the vision, nor was it a lack:
There was only, only  one  lip.
Could you see him as I you would grow mad.
That man with  only one  lip.
2-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 148.
1ª publ. in  Fernando Pessoa: o Amor, a Morte, a Iniciação . Yvette K. Centeno. Lisboa: Regra do Jogo, 1985.

THE GIANT'S REPLY
I met a giant upon my way;
He looked more wise than Nature.
«Tell me some truth», thus my tongue did betray
My soul so that more than creature.
- «There is but one's, in an old voice strange
He cried: «things are more, I say,
Than Time in which they seem to change
And than Space that seems more than they».
7-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 150.
1ª publ. in «O Espólio e a Biblioteca de Fernando Pessoa: uma Solução para alguns Enigmas». Yvette K. Centeno. in Yvette K. Centeno e Stephen Reckert.  Fernando Pessoa (Tempo, Solidão, Hermetismo) . Lisboa: Moraes Ed., 1978.

MY LIFE
I
Duty calls on me; I must fight against
That which 'tis duty unto all to fight.
Therefore, oh, illness of my will that stain'st
My mind - oh, leave me free to seek the right!
Take me from the vile sleep of purpose cold,
Give me an impulse to do good, to make
A struggle for the new against the old
Ere time my useless life away may take.
Keen is my feeling of the suffering
Of men and nations, keen into despair;
But not a will to speak it doth it bring,
Moveless I rest, not like a thing too fair,
But like a stagnant water full of filth,
A bog of will, inactive and alone,
Unopen unto Learning's fresh and tilth
And locked from doing good as men have done.
Pain ever, pain for ever! pain, oh pain!
Pain filling all my life like time or change.
Woe that goes from an inner waking strain
Unto the sleepiness of fears most strange.
Despair and horror, madness lone that feels
Its own too bitter taste until it quails,
The horror of a mind that fails and reels
And knows full well how far it reels and fails.
I sorrow for the past and at the future,
On that which never was I weep and pine,
Upon the things that never were in Nature,
On those that are and never shall be mine.
The sadness of the pleasure that has been,
The sorrow of the pain that once we had,
The ache of that which in dim visions seen
Leaves but an echo to make itself sad.
The knowledge that a dream is nothing more,
The science that our life is less than this:
It passes as it, and the bliss it wore
Was at its best the shadow of a bliss.
I ponder on the fates of men and things,
Thereat my soul grows dark and feeble grows,
To find Thought's body weighing on the wings
Which Fancy opens over fields and snows.
I ponder upon evil and on good
And both in life irrational I see,
One because it exists not, yet it should,
The other since it is and should not be.
Nothing is clear unto me; all is dark,
All is confusion to my Thought's o'er‑much;
Alas for him who thinks in life to work
Having cast far away Convention's crutch.
He finds that Custom, the least thing of all,
Is king and queen and law and creed and faith,
That Custom goes not further than our pall,
That Custom is with us past our own death.
I mourn that there are thrones, prisons and tumbs,
And yet to see all ill I am half glad:
That there are deaths, decays and rots and dooms,
A gladness whose eyes sparkle, because mad.
I weep all times the limits close that must
Deep souls ununderstood in living pen,
But weeping deeply wake to the disgust
That I weep for myself in other men.
My tears are for myself; so that they teach
To know men's ineradicable woe,
What matter what high point of pain they reach?
Haply their birth one day they 'll cease to know.
And that I shall forget this pain of mine
Forget myself - ah, would that it could be!
Forgotten like the drunkard in his wine
Or like the pauper in his misery.
'Twere madness, but sweet madness, better than
The waking, fully living consciousness
That unto a full unity doth span
The many woes and throes of my distress.
'Twere madness but 'twere better than to know
That evil is the source of life and thought,
For to feel madness is the greatest woe
That upon human consciousness is wrought.
To feel excluded, miserable, lone,
A leper deep at heart, having for sore
His being, is a misery past moan
'Tis better all to have and to ignore.
'Tis better? -  nay, who knows? the mystery
Of consciousness and knowledge who can find?
In madness and in thought what things may be?
How far is horror deep within the mind?
II
This is my life; what will the future be?
With horror I grow sick past sighs and tears,
To think how life is torture unto me,
How Thought is father of strange cares and fears.
Yesterday one spoke to me of my youth.
Youth? Life? Twelve years I had of happiness;
The seven since then have been without ruth -
Twelve years of sleep and seven of distress.
Time, I grow sick of thee! Sounds, motions, things,
I feel a tiredness before your eyes...
Give me, oh Dream of mine! thy purest wings
That I may take from solitude my cries,
That I may seek the Heaven of this life -
Death, mother of hall things that seem to be.
Die thus the hand that could not serve for strife,
The brain that strained and toiled with misery!
III
Life - what is Life? Death - what is Death? My brain
Feels as I think on this, as one that reads
Far into dusk lifts up his eyes with pain,
Aching and dim; and my heart slowly bleeds.
IV
To work? I cannot. To be gay? I've lost
Long, long ago all laughter save a base
Mirth where Despair with Apathy incrust,
That has the scent of rots and of decays.
To do good? all desire tends unto it
But al1 my will is feeble before all:
I am become a bult for my Thought's wit
Which is no wit but Consciousness all gall.
And what avails it e'er to toil or trouble,
To make my torture of my life and thought?
Is not all life the slander‑fair soap‑bubble
That by a child in empty mind is wrought?
And what avails all verse, all art and song,
All that doth make a body for itself?
My heart is keen to feel al1 human wrong,
I careless, as one born to ease and pelf.
And what avails it ever to grow pale
Over the mute and endless lore of old
Until the wearied senses strain and fail
And the worn heart is passionless and cold?
Avails it anything? It avails not.
Let me sleep then: give me a grave for bed
In the earth's heart where I not life nor thought
But rottenness and peace my have instead.
9-1-1908
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 150.

THE APOSTLE
The preacher said: «My task, it is to take
To men the mystic balsam of a creed,
And in their hearts lust-taken to awake
A fervour above life and above need.
My work: is to outcast the every greed
For beauty, and the chains of love to break,
And the whole field of youth and joy to rake
Clear for the sowing of my holy seed.
I go to preach a doctrine sweet and sad
Of sacrifice and of benevolence:
I turn my back on life, on earthly bliss.
But e'er I go ‑ oh, God, can I be mad? -
Would I could take to that cold life intense
The soul-perturbing memory of a kiss!»
19-6-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 98.
Destinado ao volume «Sonnets in Many Moods».

JUSTICE
There was a land, which I suppose,
Where everyone had a crooked nose;
And the crooked nose that everyone had
In no manner did make him sad.
But in that land a man was born
Whose nose more straight and clean was worn;
And the men of that land with a public hate
Killed the man whose nose was straight.
28-7-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 98.
Destinado ao volume «Death of God».
1ª publ. in «A Poesia Juvenil de Fernando Pessoa». Georg Rudolf Lind. in  Estudos sobre Fernando Pessoa . Lisboa: Imprensa Nacional-Casa da Moeda, 1981.

THE CIRCLE
I traced a circle on the ground,
It was a mystic figure strange
Wherein I thought there would abound
Mute symbols adequate of change,
And complex formulas of Law,
Which is the jaws of Change's maw.
My simpler thoughts in vain had stemmed
The current of this madness free,
But that my thinking is condemned
To symbol and analogy:
I deemed a circle might condense
With calm all mystery's violence.
And so in cabalistic mood
A circle traced I curious there;
Imperfect the made circle stood
Thought formed with minutest care.
From magic's failure deeply I
A lesson took to make me sigh.
30-7-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 100.
1ª publ. in «O Espólio  e a Biblioteca de Fernando Pessoa: uma solução para alguns enigmas». Yvette. K. Centeno. in Yvette. K. Centeno e Stephen Reckert.  Fernando Pessoa (Tempo. Solidão. Hermetismo) . Lisboa: Moraes, 1978.

THE WORLD
The world, as far's I understand,
Which is no further than the blind
Of colour and of shade can find
In that obscurity of theirs,
This world sunlit and grand,
Of which we are the heirs
With a proud unconsciousness,
Is worth as much as all our rhymes,
As all our things, its gilded slimes -
Nothing, and that's the most I'll say
Ere on he bed of nothingness
I turn myself the other way.
7-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 104.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium».

MEN OF SCIENCE
To toil through time and hate and to consume
Far more than life in Error's hard defeat,
Seeking e'er for the true, for the complete,
Careless of faith and misery and doom
Is there a nobler task, while life doth fleet,
Than this, to strive to make light amid gloom,
And with hands bleeding to part and make room
In life for weaker and more unsure feet?
The void o'th' world must with an arch be spanned,
The ways of Nature must be read aright
That there may be a wise and friendly hand
To make this dark world better and more bright.
Oh, with what joy and love I understand
These master-souls that ache for truth and light.
7-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 104.
Destinado ao volume «Death of God».
1ª publ. in «Introduction». F. E. G. Quintanilha. in  Sixty Poems . Fernando Pessoa. Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 1971.

THE STORY OF SOLOMON WASTE
This is  all  the story of Solomon Waste.
Always hurrying yet never in haste,
He fussed and worked and toiled all frothing
And at the end of all did nothing.
This is  all  the story of Solomon Waste.
He lived in wishing and in striving,
And nothing came of all his living;
He worked and toiled in rain and sweat,
And nothing came out of all that.
This is  all  the story of Solomon Waste.
He thought much and had no conviction,
His feeling was at best affliction
Though tender he and hating evil
He might have gained the name of devil.
His every wish and resolution
Even in his mind was but confusion.
This is  all  the story of Solomon Waste.
And things begun and never ended,
And much undone and much intended,
And all things wrong yet never mended:
This is  all  the story of Solomon Waste.
Each day new projects did betray,
Yet each day was like every day.
He was born and died and between these
He worried himself himself to tease.
He bustled, worried, moved and cried
But in his life no more's descried
Than two clear facts: he lived and died.
This is  all  the story of Solomon Waste.
11-8-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 106.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium».
1ª publ. in «A Poesia Juvenil de Fernando Pessoa». Georg Rudolf Lind. in  Humboldt , 8, nº 17. Hamburg: 1968.

FAREWELL
Farewell, farewell for ever,
I cannot more remain;
Far wider things our hearts do sever
Than continent or main -
Pride and distaste and inaptness
To feel each other's joy, distress.
Farewell, farewell for ever;
Be it not said by thee
My heart was weaker, thy heart braver
In mutual misery
But parted were we, be it said,
As are the living from the dead.
Farewell, farewell for ever,
Since love left not behind
Nor even friendship nor endeavour
Nor sorrow mad or kind.
'Tis fit indeed those souls be parted
That cannot e'er be broken-hearted.
Farewell, farewell for ever;
'Tis time this thing were done,
When love is cold which was a fever
And vulgar as a stone,
When life from woe to woe doth flee
And change itself is misery.
23-8-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 108.

REQUIESCAT
For thee, the veil of the temple is rent
And the holy of holies laid bare...
Hath mystery thy being spent
With tragic muteness eloquent;
Or with the horror living there
Is thy dead spirit blent?
Whate'er contains now thy vision's scope,
Howe'er it be, thou canst not be mad
At shadows dread for which we grope,
And at thy heart together did fade
The pleasure that doth make us sad
And the pain that makes us hope.
26-8-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 108.

THE CURTAIN
A curtain hides the mystery
That in the world is known to be,
Mute-horrid as impending thunder,
From eyes unsensual that would see
Behind it things for more than wonder -
A curtain past whose  living  folds
His court of shadows Horror holds.
And he that curtain who shall part
But in his mind, will feel the heart
Grow weak before the irony
That Nothingness pains more the heart
Than things that are or seem to be,
That Nothingness can give a fear,
A sorrow nothing can give here.
26-8-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 110.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium» e ao conjunto «Documents of Mental Decadence».

THE SEPULCHRE
Mystery, mystery is here
That brings a joy with a fear.
Oh, that Death should greater be
Than Time and Space and all we see,
That Change should deeper be than thought
And Time, like a portentous tomb,
Should feel corruption in its womb
Yet itself crumble like its rot!
For e'en the sepulchre's cold stones
Shall have a death like the dead bones
They shut in.
(What coffer can lock
Corruption out? or rottenness
What wit with cell and bolt can mock?)
Ay, even marble shall like bodies die
A death, shall have an end. The passer-by
Shall tread the dust of the stone
That on the grave did lie,
In dust now like each bone.
For to Corruption all must go,
The difference in this alone:
That some things rot quick and some slow.
Ay, the hard stone will wear away
Making the day when it was rock
Unreal as a distant day.
Only a Shadow none do know,
By the lock'd door of Time and Space,
With obscure and peculiar grace
Keeps watch never to go.
18-9-1907
Poesia Inglesa . Fernando Pessoa. (Organização e tradução de Luísa Freire. Prefácio de Teresa Rita Lopes.) Lisboa: Livros Horizonte, 1995.
- 112.
Destinado ao volume «Delirium».