«Sub Umbrâ» (?) (Book of Poems).
Must be ready on May 31st, 1904. To consist wholly of short, pretty poems.
«Martin Kéravas» (a Novel).
Must be ready any time before June 30th, 1905. To plead for peace. Length, about from 120.000 to 150.000 words.
«Simple Tales» (Stories).
Must be ready on July 31st, 1904.
Short and pathetic from 5000 to 7000 words each. Numbers about 20 or more.
«Longer Tales» (Stories).
Must be ready by December 31st,
1904.4 or 5 Tales each 30000 words long. 1. «The Atheist», 2. «The Philanthropist», etc.
«Scared heavens» (?) (Book of Plays).
Must be ready by (...) Plays: 1. «Marino, the Epicure»; 2. «The Savages», 3. «Doctor (...)  4. «Ignez de Castro»; 5.» (...)
1903
Pessoa por Conhecer - Textos para um Novo Mapa
. Teresa Rita Lopes. Lisboa: Estampa, 1990.
- 129.

«PIECES IN SUB UMBRA»
1. «Old Castle»
2. «Gahu»
3. «Woman in Black»
4. «Palace of Thought»
5. «Ode to the Storm»
6. «Ode to Music»
7. «Stanzas on Work»
8. «Nought is more cold than ashes are»...  (song) Dirge (18)
1903
Pessoa por Conhecer - Textos para um Novo Mapa
. Teresa Rita Lopes. Lisboa: Estampa, 1990.
- 130.

THE SCHOOLMASTER’S TALE
In all the ups and downs of my adventurous career I have only once filled the unenviable position of schoolmaster, in a large country school, where the superabundance of boys was in vigorous contrast to the meagreness of my salary. I was not, I must confess, particularly adapted for the work and drudgery of a pedagogue's life, but, when circumstances are pressing, we consciously overlook many faults which we should otherwise have minded. The reason for my incapacity was not that I was lacking in scholastic ability, but rather that I was entirely unblessed by that useful virtue, patience.
s.d.
Pessoa por Conhecer - Textos para um Novo Mapa
. Teresa Rita Lopes. Lisboa: Estampa, 1990.
- 131.

Nothing but a brave attempt to dissemble in laughter the most oppressing mental agonies. If so, it is all the more pitiable, because the mind which seeks relief in mirth for its intense tortures, is like he who in sleeping to get away from the thoughts of an unhappy life suffers from a terrible nightmere. But it is so difficult to discriminate! He was nor a hypocritical man, but a profound one; his feelings and thoughts were not masked, but hidden, and how his powerful mind worked, how his weak spirit fought, we cannot imagine, who are not endowed with the same mental capacities and inconsiderable character.
Yet great praise does he deserve, scant praise does he get. The cloyed mind of modern novel-readers, acustomed at length to the scurried productions of a void generation, cannot appreciate fully the psychological matter that is readable in his glittering paragraphs. The modern man has done away with all spiritual connections, he has broken away from the soul and left us nothing but a mere fleshly hulk; he has torn divinity from his heart, and, by doing this, shown us how weak and foolish a man can seem when he has to lean on nothing, as if he had attempted to lean on the unsubstantial air.
s.d.
Pessoa por Conhecer - Textos para um Novo Mapa
. Teresa Rita Lopes. Lisboa: Estampa, 1990.
- 132.

MARINO
Will[iam] - What is your pleasure, sir?
M[arino] - My pleasure, sir, is women.
Will[iam] - I mean, sir, what will you please?
M[arino] - At all reasons, friend, I whould please myself, being indeed the man I know best and know best therefore how to please. (Aside) I lie for the joking, I lie, for, by Heil, I know myself ill enough, and outside all illness what pleases me best.
s.d.
Pessoa por Conhecer - Textos para um Novo Mapa
. Teresa Rita Lopes. Lisboa: Estampa, 1990.
- 133.

INÊS DE CASTRO
D. Pedro:
(como que prostrado) Oh, frias, frias!
Estas mãos que eu beijei como estão frias!
Como mais frias do que o pensamento
Se as julgasse frias. Oh dor, oh dor!
Estes lábios (...) onde moravam
Os meus no meu ausente pensamento:
De que palidez são pálidos!
Oh horror de te olhar!
Pára-me a alma; sinto-a esfriar-me
O coração morto contigo.
Inês, Inês, Inês...
Não sei como te pensava morta
Que não te pensava assim...
Assim, assim... Teus olhos, eu lembrava-os
No meu coração. Nem ouso vê-los,
Não ouso ver o lugar onde fostes
A vida que era a minha!
Frei (...) Isto é senhor aquilo que amamos.
Que horror é este que te lista o corpo
Que verdor este que (...)
Os pecados que tive
Neste momento são por dor remidos.
Oh horror como ali está ainda a amo
A ela que ali está. Inês, Inês.
Manchei-lhe de sangue o vestido.
Eu matei-os, Inês.
s.d.
Pessoa por Conhecer - Textos para um Novo Mapa
. Teresa Rita Lopes. Lisboa: Estampa, 1990.
- 134.

«A Frenchman's Quest» (look for Mr. Smith).
«The American Missionary» (missionary with Maxim gun)
«Yachting Yarns» (various)
«The Barrier» (key upside-down in door). (Prize Tit-Bit)
«A Rogue's Escape» (a story of the Lisbon police «Bicho»).
s.d.
Pessoa por Conhecer - Textos para um Novo Mapa
. Teresa Rita Lopes. Lisboa: Estampa, 1990.
- 137.
Atribuído inicialmente a Lucas Merrick, cujo nome foi depois riscado.