Sign in

theophrastus


AI Mode
All
Images
Videos
Shopping
Forums
Short videos
News
Books
Web
Maps
Flights
Finance
Search tools
Feedback
Theophrastus
Philosopher
Image of Theophrastus greek hi-res stock photography and images - Alamy
Source: Alamy
Image of Theophrastus - Wikipedia
Image of Theophrastus | Peripatetic School, Natural History, Botany ...
Image of Botany Beginnings: Who was Theophrastus? – Herbal Academy
Image of Theophrastus' Characters | City Journal
Image of The Unsung Hero of Western Science - The Atlantic
Image of Theophrastus, c. 371 – c. 287 BC. Greek philosopher and ...
Image of Theophrastus' Characters: An Ancient Take on Bad Behavior
Image of Theophrastus - Characters - Classical Liberal Arts Academy
Image of Theophrastus | wein.plus Lexicon
Image of Theophrastos.jpg
Image of Theophrastus | Art UK
Image of Looking for Theophrastus by Laura Beatty | Book review | The TLS
Image of Botany Beginnings: Who was Theophrastus? – Herbal Academy
Image of Theophrastus Stock Illustrations – 6 Theophrastus Stock ...
Born
Eresos, Greece
Died
Athens, Greece
Overview
Theophrastus was an ancient Greek philosopher and naturalist. A native of Eresos in Lesbos, he was Aristotle's close colleague and successor as head of the Lyceum, the Peripatetic school of philosophy in Athens. 
Wikipedia


Goodreads
Theophrastus: Characters - Goodreads
Jan 1, 2026

7:56

VIS PHILO.
Theophrastus: The Father of Botany｜Philosopher Biography
Jan 29, 2024
Quick facts
.
Born: Eresos, Greece
Died: Athens, Greece
Parents: Melantas
Full name: Tyrtamus
People also ask
What was Theophrastus known for?
Why is Theophrastus called the father of botany?
How do you pronounce "Theophrastus" in English?
What was Theophrastus' real name?

Wikipedia
https://en.wikipedia.org
Theophrastus
Theophrastus wrote numerous treatises across all areas of philosophy, working to support, improve, expand, and develop the Aristotelian system. He made ...
Life
Writings
Philosophy
The "portrait" of Theophrastus
In popular culture
Works
People also search for

Strato of Lampsacus

Aristotle

Alexander of Aphrodisias

Arcesilaus

Pyrrho

Polemon of Athens

Crantor

Sextus Empiricus

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
https://plato.stanford.edu
Theophrastus - Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
by K Ierodiakonou · 2016 · Cited by 34 — Theophrastus (c. 371–287 BCE) was a Peripatetic philosopher who was Aristotle's close colleague and successor at the Lyceum. He wrote many ...
Books
.

On the causes of plants

Characters

Historia Plantarum
1525

The Characters of Theophrastus: An English Tr. from a Rev. Text

De sensu

Theophrastou Eresiou ta sōzomena: Supplementum et indicem rerum et verborum continens. Lipsiae, 1821. lxvi, 549, [1] p

Theophrastou Charaktēres ēthikoi

Peri tōn lithōn biblion: With an English version and notes, including the Modern history of the Gems described by that Author, and of many other of the Native Fossils : To which are added, two letters: I. On the Colours of the Saphire and Turquoise II. Upon the Effects of different Menstruums on Copper ...
See more

University at Buffalo
https://ubwp.buffalo.edu
Theophrastus 372-287 BC – A History of Speech – Language Pathology
Theophrastus was a Greek philosopher who wrote on the classification of plants. He was a student of Plato and a friend of Aristotle.

Britannica
https://www.britannica.com
Theophrastus | Peripatetic School, Natural History, Botany
6 days ago — Theophrastus was a Greek Peripatetic philosopher and pupil of Aristotle. He studied at Athens under Aristotle, and when Aristotle was forced ...

Loeb Classical Library
https://www.loebclassics.com
Theophrastus, Enquiry into Plants, Volume I: Books 1-5
Theophrastus of Eresus in Lesbos, born about 370 BCE, is the author of the most important botanical works that have survived from classical antiquity.
Videos
Theophrastus (EN)
YouTube · about-the-world
Jan 7, 2025

4:11
10 key moments in this video
Theophrastus: The Father of Botany｜Philosopher Biography
YouTube · VIS PHILO.
Jan 29, 2024

7:56
3 key moments in this video
Theophrastus of Eresus
YouTube · Knowledge=fun
May 2, 2026

8:05

Herbal Academy
https://theherbalacademy.com
Botany Beginnings: Who was Theophrastus?
Jul 21, 2020 — Theophrastus is known as the “father of botany” because his descriptive writings helped create a new frontier in scientific botanical ...

Classical Liberal Arts Academy
https://classicalliberalarts.com
Theophrastus - Characters
The Characters is a work of ethical philosophy written by Theophrastus, a student of Aristotle, in the 4th century BCE. The work describes 30 different ...

National Institutes of Health (NIH) | (.gov)
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
Theophrastus Bombastus Von Hohenheim (Paracelsus) (1493–1541) - PMC - NIH
by SN Michaleas · 2021 · Cited by 60 — Theophrastus Bombastus Von Hohenheim known as Paracelsus was a German-Swiss homo universalis, or Renaissance man, whose interests included medicine, chemistry ...

California Academy of Sciences
https://www.calacademy.org
Theophrastus: Systematically Defining our Natural World
Mar 3, 2010 — Student, collaborator, and successor of Aristotle, Theophrastus, (4th century BCE), began the first scientific approach to botany. He is also ...
People also search for
Brightmoor, Detroit, MI - Based on your past activity
Update location
Dark theme: on
Help
Feedback
Privacy
Terms